# Background {#background}

A note regarding nomenclature: Healy [-@healy_estimating_2010] gives clear definitions for a number of recharge-related terms:

* potential recharge: water that has infiltrated into the root zone; this water may leave the bottom of the root zone, eventually becoming recharge, or it may be removed from the soil column by means of evaporation and transpiration.
* deep percolation or net infiltration: water that has escaped the root zone and will eventually find its way to the groundwater table.

In this and the previous documentation of SWB, potential recharge is defined as water that leaves the bottom of the root zone and may become groundwater recharge after transiting the remainder of the unsaturated zone. The reason for using the term potential recharge in this manner was to emphasize the point that SWB does not simulate any processes beneath the root zone, and reflects the fact that there may be a considerable delay between the time the water leaves the bottom of the root zone and the time it meets the groundwater table. The term potential recharge as used in this document is the same as Healy's [-@healy_estimating_2010] deep percolation or net infiltration.

Groundwater recharge can vary greatly over time and space. Site-specific data, when available, are not applicable to regional-scale problems. Groundwater modelers often assume that a fraction of precipitation is converted to recharge, or they instead use recharge as a calibration parameter. In transient groundwater-modeling problems, use of a physically based, spatially variable recharge boundary condition has been found to improve model performance [@jyrkama_impact_2007].

Numerical modeling is one technique sometimes used to supply a spatially varied, transient recharge boundary condition on a regional scale [@scanlon_choosing_2002]. Simple soil-water-balance models are a category of numerical models commonly applied to groundwater recharge estimation problems. There perhaps are hundreds of soil-water-balance models described in the literature. Many soil-water-balance models were developed in order to evaluate crop irrigation requirements and impacts [@kendy_soil_water_balance_2003], crop yield prediction [@akinremi_simulation_1996], and landfill cover design [@schroeder_hydrologic_1994].

Similarly, there are many examples of groundwater recharge estimation by means of a soil-water-balance. For example, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) HELP model, a soil-water-balance code used in landfill design [@schroeder_hydrologic_1994], has been linked to commercial geographic information system (GIS) software [@jyrkama_impact_2007]. WetSpass calculates long-term recharge by means of a soil-water-balance model within a commercial GIS software package [@batelaan_wetspass_2001].  [@finch_estimating_2001] describes a distributed daily soil-water-balance model, but does not specify the computing platform.

The SWB code described in this report was derived from work completed as part of a doctoral dissertation at the University of Wisconsin-Madison [@dripps_spatial_2003; @dripps_simple_2007]. This code was written in Visual Basic for Applications inside of a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet [@dripps_spatial_2003].

Each of the examples listed above either requires proprietary software, is implemented in a proprietary language, is complex to set up and use, or is not distributed in the public domain. For these reasons, in 2006, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) translated the original soil-water-balance code from Visual Basic to modern Fortran 95.

Within the USGS, water balance models have long been used as a means to estimate potential groundwater recharge. The Yucca Mountain Project of the 1980s and 1990s produced the INFIL 3.0 model [@us_geological_survey_documentation_2008]. The Basin Characterization Model (BCM) has been applied to significant tracts of the southwestern United States [@flint_application_2007; @flint_application_2007]. A similar model was developed and applied in Montana, Idaho, and Washington State [@bauer_documentation_1987; @bauer_estimates_1990]. A custom water balance model has been applied to the Hawaiian Islands for decades [@izuka_simple_2010, @engott_water_budget_2011]. Another custom water balance model was applied to the central Midwest regional aquifer system, with special emphasis on estimating consumptive use of water and the resulting impact on recharge [@dugan_effects_1985]. These models have generally been developed with specific environmental settings in mind (Yucca Mountain, Hawaiian Islands), are known well to only their authors, or would be difficult to apply to other more general use cases. However, these previous works also represent a significant body of work aimed at generating improved recharge estimates, and as time permits the good ideas and process implementations in those codes will be adapted to the SWB code.

For reasons of ease of use, non-reliance on proprietary software, and in the interest of general applicability, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) translated the original soil-water-balance code from Visual Basic to modern Fortran 95 (Westenbroek and others, 2010). This code was derived from work completed as part of a doctoral dissertation at the University of Wisconsin-Madison [@dripps_spatial_2003]. The SWB code has evolved since the original release, with crop water demand calculations and addition of some of the functionality of the Hawaiian Water Budget Code [@izuka_simple_2010].
