
# Potential Limitations to Application of the SWB Code {#potential_limitations}

The original concept behind the SWB code was to allow for the spatial distribution of groundwater recharge to be quickly and easily calculated on the basis of readily available data and a standardized set of parameters @cite dripps_spatial_2003. The version of the SWB model described here retains most of the features that made the original model attractive from the standpoint of practical application @cite dripps_spatial_2003, dripps_simple_2007. Despite the possible limitations given below, the SWB model approach should be capable of generating reasonable annual or monthly mean groundwater recharge estimates at the scale of a small catchment @cite dripps_simple_2007. In order to do so, however, the user will have to upscale the daily results offered by the SWB model and average or filter the results over a larger area. The relative spatial variability and pattern of recharge between catchments should also be of great value, particularly if these estimates can be corroborated with recharge estimates generated from streamgages or observation wells. Comparing SWB-calculated recharge estimates to those estimated from streamflow records, or from a groundwater model calibrated to stream fluxes is recommended.

As with any numerical model, the burden is on the user to preprocess the input grids in the most appropriate manner. If the user has not done this, then SWB will generally halt after giving the user a description of the problem it detects for an input grid. Although the SWB code can certainly be applied using only available data and a standard set of curve numbers, it would be prudent to treat the results with caution, as one should with any model output. In addition, certain underlying theoretical limitations should be kept in mind when interpreting SWB model output. These limitations are discussed below.

**Runoff routing.** The inclusion of overland-flow routing in the code ensures that runoff from an upslope grid cell has one or more opportunities to contribute to infiltration in the cells that are downslope from it. However, all runoff from a cell is assumed to infiltrate in downslope cells or be routed out of the model domain on the same day in which it originated as rainfall or snowmelt.
In addition, once water is routed to a closed surface depression and evapotranspiration and soil-moisture demands are met, the only loss mechanism is recharge. This results in cases where maximum recharge values of hundreds or thousands of inches per year are calculated. These extremely high values are unrealistic and likely result from surface storage of water not being accounted for. The code described here allows the user to enter a maximum recharge rate for each land-cover and soil-group combination. This feature offers a way to restrict the estimated recharge values to a more reasonable range; however, the rejected recharge is nonetheless removed from the model domain on the same day in which it originated as precipitation or snowmelt.

**Groundwater/surface-water interaction.** Interactions between surface-water and groundwater features are not simulated in the SWB code and could not be without significantly increasing the complexity of the model. In locations where the water table is beneath the bottom of the root-zone, the SWB code should be capable of producing reasonable annual or monthly values. The depth from the bottom of the root zone to the top of the water table is not considered in the estimation of recharge; there may be a significant time of travel through the unsaturated zone. Coupling the SWB code with an unsaturated-zone code that could route water to the water table, such as the MODFLOW UZF Package (Niswonger and others 2006), would be one way to address this limitation.

In areas with wetlands, springs, lakes, or other landscape features where the water table is close to the land surface, the SWB code can be expected to perform poorly; there is currently no provision for recharge rejection via saturation excess other than by specifying a maximum recharge rate for a particular combination of land use and soil type.

**Curve number method.** In the current version of the SWB model, it is assumed that infiltration is the sum of net precipitation, snowmelt, and inflow, minus the runoff calculated by means of the NRCS curve number method. Runoff calculation at a plot or field scale in a continuous simulation by means of the curve number method may be beyond the limits of the method. The list of perceived limitations associated with the curve number method includes the following @cite garen_curve_2005:
* method cannot be used to identify runoff processes, source areas, or flow paths;
* method is a watershed-scale method that should not be applied at a plot or field (or grid cell) scale; and
* method was developed to evaluate floods and was not designed to simulate daily flows of ordinary magnitude.

In addition, it has been suggested that the curve number itself is not constant but varies from event to event and that the antecedent-runoff condition explains only some of this variability @cite hjelmfelt_jr._investigation_1991. Given variability in the curve numbers themselves, as well as the other limitations of the curve number method, it is reasonable to treat the standard curve number table values merely as starting points; ideally, the curve numbers should be verified by use of observed paired precipitation-runoff data @cite hawkins_asymptotic_1993.

The SWB code contains an alternative method for calculating runoff that incorporates a much smaller initial abstraction term. Use of this alternative method for calculating the initial abstraction may be more appropriate for continuous simulation @cite woodward_runoff_2003. Users of the SWB code have the option of defining the initial abstraction term as $I_{a} = 0.05S_{max}$, compared to $I_a = 0.2S_{max}$. The use of this smaller initial abstraction term results in more runoff generation for areas with low curve numbers and for storms of smaller magnitude. If the smaller initial abstraction term is used, curve numbers are automatically scaled by the SWB code to maintain an appropriately shaped rainfall-runoff curve @cite woodward_runoff_2003.

The modular design of the SWB code makes it feasible to add new process modules relatively easily. Although there are no immediate plans to do so, future versions of SWB could include an implementation of the Green-Ampt infiltration method @cite green_studies_1911, and an enhanced ability to route and store overland flow.

**Snowmelt and infiltration.** For temperate areas that experience snowfall and snowmelt, the SWB model is sensitive to snowmelt, and in particular, to how snowmelt translates into surface runoff. The addition of a continuous frozen ground index (CFGI) to the SWB code offers a simple way to approximate the effects of frozen ground. Spring runoff may be increased by lowering the setpoints at which the ground is considered to change from unfrozen to frozen; lowering the CFGI setpoints has the effect of increasing the amount of time that the runoff curve numbers are shifted toward antecedent runoff condition III.

Other modelers have altered the curve number in an attempt to simulate runoff from frozen ground. For example, Carroll and others (2005) assigned a separate set of curve numbers to soils considered to be frozen and another set of curve numbers to soils considered to be unfrozen. Despite this, there is no theoretical basis supporting the derivation of a frozen-ground curve number, so its use in the SWB code is primarily for expediency and consistency with other model input considerations.

Because the CFGI is based on air temperatures, the SWB code is unable to resolve differences in snowmelt timing between grid cells with differing ground-surface orientation relative to the sun (aspect).

**Climate variability.** Year-to-year climate variability causes corresponding variability in calculated recharge values. Use of multiple years of climate data should help to minimize the effect of year-to-year climate variability on estimated recharge values.

