## Maui, Hawaii {#example_maui_hawaii}

SWB 2.0 was used to estimate potential recharge for the Island of Maui, Hawai‘i. These estimates were compared to the potential recharge estimates generated for a previous USGS study  [@johnson_spatially_2014] using the Hawai‘i Water Budget code.

### Description of Maui

The Island of Maui has an area of about 728 square miles ($\text{mi}^2$) and is the second largest island in the Hawaiian archipelago. Maui is composed of two shield volcanoes. The older volcano, the West Maui Mountain, rises to an altitude of 5,788 ft at Pu‘u Kukui, and the younger volcano, the East Maui Volcano (commonly referred to as Haleakalā), rises to an altitude of 10,023 ft at Pu‘u ‘Ula‘ula (Red Hill). The two volcanoes are connected by an isthmus that is covered with terrestrial and marine sedimentary deposits that are as much as 5 miles wide [@stearns_geology_1942]. Erosion of the West Maui Mountain has carved deep valleys and sharp-crested ridges that radiate from near the summit. On Haleakalā, the rainy eastern slope has valleys that are separated by broad areas and ridges. The drier western slope of Haleakalā is less incised and retains the broad, shield shape of the volcano.

Steep gradients in mean annual rainfall patterns on Maui reflect the influence of persistent trade winds and orographic rainfall [@giambelluca_online_2013]. On an island-wide basis, mean rainfall on Maui is about 81 inches per year (in/yr). Mean rainfall is more than 360 in/yr at Pu‘u Kukui. About 5 mi southwest of Pu‘u Kukui, mean rainfall is less than 15 in/yr. Mean rainfall exceeds 100 in/yr for much of the interior uplands of the West Maui Mountain. On Haleakalā, mean rainfall exceeds 200 in/yr on mid-altitude windward slopes. At a rain gage (not shown) near 5,400 ft altitude on windward Haleakalā, mean rainfall is about 404 in/yr, which is among the highest values in the Hawaiian Islands and the world during 1978–2007 [@giambelluca_online_2013]. Leeward slopes in the rain shadow of Haleakalā are much drier. Mean rainfall is less than 25 in/yr for most leeward areas along the coastline and the isthmus. The summit area of Haleakalā is also relatively dry, with mean rainfall between about 35 and 50 in/yr.

### Application of the Models

Gridded SWB 2.0 model input was generated using the polygon-based model input for the Hawaii Water Budget code used in Johnson and others [-@johnson_spatially_2014]. The model-grid size for SWB 2.0 is 25 meters by 25 meters. For both models, the monthly rainfall time series used is 1978–2007 and the land cover is representative of 2010.
