Appendix 3. Input Data, Lookup-Table Entries, and Control-File
Directives by Method

Soil-Water-Balance (SWB) code was designed so that parameters may be
supplied to the model on an as-needed basis. As more calculation methods
were added to the original SWB version 1.0 code, the input requirements
increased and become more complicated. For this reason, the authors
created a flexible table-based format that allows parameters to be
supplied in any order convenient to the user. As with SWB version 1.0,
the key value in the lookup table (or tables) is the land-use code; all
parameter values supplied in the tables must contain values for each of
the land-use values present in the land-use grid file. Land-use values
must be in the same order in all of the tables. For example, if one
supplied two tables, one ordered by increasing land-use code values, and
the other with land-use codes in random order, it is certain that the
output SWB results would be corrupted. The mismatch in land-use codes
between the tables would result in parameter values being paired with
incorrect land-use codes.

For table-based parameter entry, the proper parameter name must be
entered in the header of the file. Case does not matter for these
heading entries: DEPLETION\_FRACTION will work as well as
depletion\_fraction or Depletion\_Fraction. For some methods, multiple
heading values are recognized as equivalent to one another. For example,
to identify a particular table column as holding land-use/land-cover
codes, SWB recognizes any of the following: LU\_Code, Land\_use\_Code,
or Land use lookup Code. Note also, that SWB will fill any blank spaces
in the header with underscores before evaluating the values therein.
Thus, Land use lookup Code will be treated as Land\_use\_Lookup\_Code by
SWB. The idea is that if an identification makes sense to the modeler,
the identification should be recognized by SWB.

Note that many processes require entries in both the control file and
the lookup tables. In addition, some parameters have been designed so
that they may be provided by lookup-table entries and by a control-file
entry that specifies a gridded parameter set. The provision for
accepting values from tables or gridfiles was done to provide the user
with maximum flexibility regarding parameter-value specification.

This section describes in detail the data, lookup-table entries, and
control-file requirements for each method currently implemented in SWB.

# Precipitation

Three methods exist to supply SWB with daily precipitation data. The
required control-file syntax and lookup-table entries for each method
are listed in tables 3–1 and 3–2.

1.  Precipitation-method control-file entries.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Tabular</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>PRECIPITATION_METHOD TABULAR </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Gridded data</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>PRECIPITATION_METHOD GRIDDED</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Method of fragments</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>PRECIPITATION_METHOD METHOD_OF_FRAGMENTS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>PRECIPITATION {grid type} {gridfile name}</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>RAINFALL_ZONE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>RAINFALL_ADJUST_FACTOR_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>RAINFALL_ADJUST_FACTOR {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>RAINFALL_ADJUST_FACTOR_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>FRAGMENTS_DAILY_FILE {path and filename of rainfall</p>
<p>fragments file}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

2.  Precipitation-method lookup-table entries.

\[mm/dd/yyyy, month/day/year; --, no entry\]

| Field name (column name)   |
| -------------------------- |
| Method—Tabular input       |
| weather\_date              |
| precipitation\_amount      |
| Method—Gridded input       |
| \--                        |
| Method—Method of fragments |
| \--                        |

The method of fragments requires the following specific datasets to
function: (1) grid of rainfall zones, (2) month-year or monthly grids of
precipitation, and (3) a fragments file containing a record of the
fraction of monthly rainfall falling on each day of the month,
associated with a set of rain gages. Rain gages considered for fragment
generation should be selected based on proximity to the area of interest
and the length and completeness of daily records. Thiessen polygons are
drawn around each of the selected rain gages and the daily rainfall
pattern within each Thiessen polygon is assumed to be the same as the
pattern at the rain gage. Daily rainfall fragments are generated by
dividing each daily rainfall measurement for a particular month by the
total rainfall measured at the gage for that month. This calculation
results in a set of fragments for that particular month in which the
total number of fragments is equal to the number of days in the month.
Daily rainfall for a given month is synthesized by multiplying total
rainfall for that month by each fragment in the set.

Fragment sets are compiled for every selected gage for every month in
which complete daily rainfall measurements are available. Fragment sets
are grouped by month of the year and by rain gage. In the water-balance
calculation, the fragment set used for a given gage for a given month is
selected randomly from among available sets for that gage for that
month. An extract from a fragments file is shown in Figure 3–1.

10 1 1 0.073 0.000 0.139 0.000 0.230 0.048 0.007 0.005 0.000 ... 0.180

10 2 1 0.013 0.032 0.040 0.021 0.005 0.023 0.038 0.001 0.000 ... 0.042

10 3 1 0.014 0.101 0.127 0.000 0.000 0.043 0.000 0.000 0.000 ... 0.000

10 4 1 0.000 0.000 0.049 0.175 0.000 0.000 0.014 0.497 0.000 ... 0.000

10 5 1 0.006 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.011 0.357 0.055 0.006 0.011 ... 0.000

10 6 1 0.018 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.002 0.002 0.029 0.210 0.000 ... 0.000

10 7 1 0.023 0.109 0.117 0.141 0.070 0.023 0.020 0.098 0.039 ... 0.000

10 8 1 0.021 0.000 0.019 0.000 0.008 0.036 0.061 0.000 0.000 ... 0.000

1.  Extract from a fragments file.

The fragments file (figure 3–1) contains columns of data that consist of
the following information.

  - Column 1 contains of month number (ranges from 1 to 12).

  - Column 2 contains of rainfall zone (gage) identification number
    (ranges from 1 to the number of rainfall gages).

  - Column 3 contains fragment index number (ranges from 1 to number of
    fragments for the given rainfall gage).

  - Columns 4 through 34 consist of daily fragment values for each day
    of the month.

The sum of any given row for columns 4 through 34 will, by definition,
equal 1. Values must be provided for columns 32 through 34 regardless of
the actual number of days in the month. Providing values of zero in
these columns for months with less than 31 days is suggested. SWB
ignores the value provided for nonexistent days of the month.

The SWB control file needs to have a RAINFALL\_ZONE directive specifying
the distribution of rainfall zones (rainfall zone grid) for the model
domain. A sequence of monthly rainfall grids also must be specified in
the control file (for example, PRECIPITATION ARC\_GRID
precip\_%0m\_%Y.asc).

# Interception

The bucket, Horton, and Gash methods are available for estimating the
amount of precipitation intercepted by vegetation before reaching the
soil reservoir. The bucket method is the simplest of the three methods,
requiring that daily precipitation exceed some interception threshold
before allowing the precipitation to reach the soil surface. The Horton
method extends the bucket method by allowing for some additional
fraction of daily precipitation to be captured as intercepted water.
Finally, the Gash method allows interception to be estimated based on
parameters describing the storage capacity and density of the
vegetation. The control-file syntax and lookup-table entries required to
use any of these interception methods are listed in tables 3–3 and 3–4.

3.  Interception-method control-file entries.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file synta</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Bucket</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>INTERCEPTION_METHOD BUCKET</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Horton</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>INTERCEPTION_METHOD HORTON</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Gash</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>INTERCEPTION_METHOD GASH</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>FRACTION_CANOPY_COVER {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>FRACTION_CANOPY_COVER_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>EVAPORATION_TO_RAINFALL_RATIO {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>EVAPORATION_TO_RAINFALL_RATIO_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

4.  Interception-method lookup-table entries.

\[--, no entry\]

| Field name (column name)            |
| ----------------------------------- |
| Method—Bucket                       |
| growing\_season\_interception       |
| nongrowing\_season\_interception    |
| Method—Horton                       |
| growing\_season\_interception\_a    |
| growing\_season\_interception\_b    |
| growing\_season\_interception\_n    |
| nongrowing\_season\_interception\_a |
| nongrowing\_season\_interception\_b |
| nongrowing\_season\_interception\_n |
| Method—Gash                         |
| canopy\_storage\_capacity           |
| trunk\_storage\_capacity            |
| stemflow\_fraction                  |

#   

# Snowfall

SWB version 2.0 contains a single method for partitioning precipitation
into rainfall and snowfall, the SINGLE\_TEMPERATURE method. This method
is the default method; therefore, a control-file entry is not required.

# Snowmelt

SWB version 2.0 contains a single snowmelt method, the
TEMPERATURE\_INDEX method. This method is the default method; therefore,
a control-file entry is not required.

# Fog Interception

The fog-interception method is set to NONE by default. Fog interception
may be enabled by supplying a set of grids that specify the ratio of
captured fog relative to the monthly rainfall rate. The control-file
syntax and lookup-table entries needed to include fog interception in a
simulation are listed in tables 3–5 and 3–6.

5.  Fog-interception control-file entries.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— None</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>FOG_METHOD NONE </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Gridded data</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>FOG_METHOD GRIDDED</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>FOG_RATIO {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>FOG_RATIO_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

6.  Fog-interception lookup-table entries.

\[--, no entry\]

| **Field name (column name)** |
| ---------------------------- |
| Method—None                  |
| \--                          |
| Method—Gridded input         |
| fog\_catch\_efficiency       |

#   

# Runoff

Runoff may be simulated in one of two ways. The first, and original,
method is the Natural Resources Conservation Sevice CURVE\_NUMBER
method, which uses hydrologic soil groups and land-use codes to
differentiate rainfall-runoff responses for each grid cell. The second
method, derived from the Hawaii Water- Budget Code, is the MONTHLY\_GRID
method, which uses externally calculated monthly runoff ratios relative
to rainfall to derive runoff values. The control-file syntax and
lookup-table entries required for these methods are listed in tables 3–7
and 3–8.

7.  Runoff method control-file entries.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Curve number</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>RUNOFF_METHOD CURVE_NUMBER </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Monthly grid</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>RUNOFF_METHOD MONTHLY_GRID</p>
<p>- or -</p>
<p>RUNOFF_METHOD RUNOFF_RATIO</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>RUNOFF_ZONE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>RUNOFF_ZONE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>RUNOFF_RATIO_MONTHLY_FILE {path and filename of monthly</p>
<p>runoff ratio file}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

8.  Runoff method lookup-table entries.

| Field name (column name) |
| ------------------------ |
| Method— Curve number     |
| CN\_\#                   |
| Method—Monthly grid      |
| \--                      |

# 

# Impervious Surface Runoff

Runoff from impervious surfaces may be simulated in a more detailed
manner by including a gridded dataset defining the proportion of each
grid cell that is comprised of impervious materials. Data on pervious
surface coverage may be supplied either as a fraction (0.0–1.0) using
the FRACTION\_PERVIOUS\_COVER control-file entry or as a percentage
(0–100 percent) using the PERCENT\_PERVIOUS\_COVER control-file entry.
Data on impervious surface coverage may be supplied either as a fraction
(0.0–1.0) using the FRACTION\_IMPERVIOUS\_COVER control-file entry or as
a percentage (0–100 percent) using the PERCENT\_IMPERVIOUS\_COVER
control-file entry. A METHOD directive is not required because the
impervious surface calculations are always made during an SWB run.
However, because the default PERCENT\_PERVIOUS\_COVER is 100 percent,
the results of these subgrid calculations will not be seen unless some
amount of impervious surface is specified for one or more grid cells.
The control file entries for the activation and use of the impervious
surface runoff method are listed in table 3–9.

9.  Impervious-surface control-file entries.

\[SWB, Soil-Water-Balance Code\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Tabular</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>PERCENT_PERVIOUS_COVER {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>PERCENT_PERVIOUS_COVER_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Runoff Routing

Runoff from pervious and impervious surfaces may be routed to downslope
cells if desired. A runoff routing fraction grid may be supplied to
allow an externally calculated fraction of surface runoff to either be
routed downslope or be extracted from the model domain. The required
control-file syntax for the routing methods is listed in table 3–10.

10. Flow-routing method control-file syntax.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—No flow routing</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>RUNOFF_ROUTING NONE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Downhill routing</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>RUNOFF_ROUTING D8</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Downhill routing with routing fraction</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>RUNOFF_ROUTING D8</p>
<p>RUNOFF_ROUTING_FRACTION {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>RUNOFF_ROUTING_FRACTION_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Potential Evapotranspiration

SWB can calculate potential evapotranspiration by means of the
Jensen-Haise or Hargreaves-Samani methods or can accept externally
calculated grids of monthly potential evapotranspiration. The required
control-file syntax for the three methods are listed in table 3–11.

11. Potential evapotranspiration-method control-file entries.

\[SWB, Soil-Water-Balance Code; ET<sub>0</sub>, reference
evapotranspiration\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Jensen-Haise</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>POTENTIAL_EVAPOTRANSPIRATION_METHOD JENSEN-HAISE </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Hargreaves-Samani</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>POTENTIAL_EVAPOTRANSPIRATION_METHOD HARGREAVES-SAMANI</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Monthly grid</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>POTENTIAL_EVAPOTRANSPIRATION_METHOD GRIDDED</p>
<p>REFERENCE_ET0 {grid type} {gridfile name} REFERENCE_ET0_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Available Water Capacity/Available Water Content

SWB contains a single method (GRIDDED) for populating the available
water-capacity parameter. Units of the gridded data are inches per foot;
in other words, the number of inches of water storage per foot of
plant-rooting depth. The required control-file syntax is listed in table
3–12.

12. Available water-capacity control-file entries.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Gridded</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>AVAILABLE_WATER_CAPACITY_METHOD GRIDDED </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>AVAILABLE_WATER_CAPACITY {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>AVAILABLE_WATER_CAPACITY_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The capacity of the soil-moisture reservoir is determined by multiplying
the available water capacity in inches per foot by the root-zone depth
in feet, which yields the capacity of the soil-moisture reservoir in
inches. Specifying gridded-available water capacity implies that a set
of root-zone depths also will be supplied in one of the lookup tables in
order that SWB can calculate the soil-moisture reservoir capacity.

# Rooting Depth

Rooting depth may be treated as static or dynamic. Dynamic rooting
depths only have relevance when the crop-coefficients module is invoked.
The required control-file syntax and lookup-table entries are listed in
tables 3–13 and 3–14.

13. Rooting-depth method control-file entries.

\[--, no entry\]

| Control-file syntax                 |
| ----------------------------------- |
| Method—Gridded                      |
| **ROOTING\_DEPTH\_METHOD STATIC **  |
| Method—Dynamic                      |
| **ROOTING\_DEPTH\_METHOD DYNAMIC ** |

14. Effective rooting-depth lookup-table entries.

| Field name (column name) |
| ------------------------ |
| Method— Gridded          |
| RZ\_\#                   |

# Soil-Storage Maximum

The original way to parameterize the total volume of soil-moisture
storage (or plant-available water) was to specify an available
water-capacity grid and a set of effective plant-rooting depths in the
lookup table. SWB would multiply these two values to come up with the
size of the soil-storage reservoir.

In some cases, calculating the size of the soil-moisture reservoir
outside of the SWB framework may be useful. This calculation may be
accomplished by specifying that the soil-storage maximum will be read
into SWB from an external grid file. Specifying the soil-storage maximum
this way will cause the rooting depths and available water-capacity
values to be ignored; any soil-moisture reservoir-capacity value that
has been calculated previously will be overwritten with the
soil-moisture maximum-grid values.

The required control-file syntax and lookup-table entries are listed in
tables 3–15 and 3–16.

15. Soil-storage maximum control-file entries.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Calculated</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>SOIL_STORAGE_MAX_METHOD CALCULATED </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Gridded</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>SOIL_STORAGE_MAX_METHOD GRIDDED </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>SOIL_STORAGE_MAX {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>SOIL_STORAGE_MAX_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Actual Evapotranspiration/Soil Moisture Retention

SWB has four methods for simulating the soil-moisture retention and
actual evapotranspiration. Of the four methods, two methods implement
the Thornthwaite-Mather soil-moisture-retention relations, whereas the
other two methods implement the FAO–56 soil-moisture-retention
relations, in varying degrees of complexity. The control-file syntax and
lookup-table entries for the various methods are listed in tables 3–16
and 3–17.

16. Actual evapotranspiration/soil-moisture method control-file syntax.

\[FAO–56, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Paper
No. 56 (Allen and others, 1998); --, no entry\]

| Control-file syntax                                   |
| ----------------------------------------------------- |
| Method— Thornthwaite-Mather                           |
| **SOIL\_MOISTURE\_METHOD THORNTHWAITE-MATHER **       |
| Method—Thornthwaite-Mather equations                  |
| SOIL\_MOISTURE\_METHOD THORNTHWAITE-MATHER\_EQUATIONS |
| Method—FAO–56 single stage                            |
| SOIL\_MOISTURE\_METHOD FAO–56                         |
| Method—FAO–56 two stage                               |
| SOIL\_MOISTURE\_METHOD FAO–56\_TWO\_STAGE             |

17. Actual evapotranspiration/soil-moisture method lookup-table entries.

\[FAO–56, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Paper
No. 56 (Allen and others, 1998); --, no entry; RAW, readily available
water; TAW, total available water\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Field name (column name)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— Thornthwaite-Mather</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>--</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Thornthwaite-Mather equations</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>--</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—FAO–56 single stage, FAO–56 two stage</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>depletion fraction</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—FAO–56 two stage</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>total evaporable water</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>readily evaporable water</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>mean plant height</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Crop Coefficients

Crop-coefficient calculations are made using FAO–56 methodology (Allen
and others, 1998). The method involves construction of a simplified
crop-coefficient curve by defining a few key growth milestones. SWB
allows these crop-coefficient curves to be defined in three different
ways as follows: (1) by number of days since planting, (2) by number of
growing degree days since planting, and (3) by month. Each land use (or
crop type) may have its crop-coefficient curve specified in one of these
three ways. SWB will determine which crop-coefficient definition method
to use for each crop type based on the presence or absence of valid data
in the associated lookup-table entries.

The required control-file syntax and lookup-table entries are listed in
tables 3–18 and 3–19.

18. Crop-coefficient control-file entries.

\[FAO–56, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Paper
No. 56 (Allen and others, 1998)\]

| Control-file syntax                   |
| ------------------------------------- |
| Method— None                          |
| **CROP\_COEFFICIENT\_METHOD NONE **   |
| Method—Curve number                   |
| **CROP\_COEFFICIENT\_METHOD FAO–56 ** |

19. Crop-coefficient lookup-table entries.

\[--, no entry; FAO–56, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Paper No. 56 (Allen and others, 1998); DOY, day of year; mm/dd,
month/day; GDD, growing degree day\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Field name (column name)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—None</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>--</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—FAO–56</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Planting_date</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>L_ini</p>
<p>L_dev</p>
<p>L_mid</p>
<p>L_late</p>
<p>L_fallow</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Kcb_ini</p>
<p>Kcb_mid</p>
<p>Kcb_end</p>
<p>Kcb_min</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>GDD_plant</p>
<p>GDD_ini</p>
<p>GDD_dev</p>
<p>GDD_mid</p>
<p>GDD_late</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Kcb_Jan</p>
<p>Kcb_Feb</p>
<p>Kcb_Mar</p>
<p>Kcb_Apr</p>
<p>Kcb_May</p>
<p>Kcb_Jun</p>
<p>Kcb_Jul</p>
<p>Kcb_Aug</p>
<p>Kcb_Sep</p>
<p>Kcb_Oct</p>
<p>Kcb_Nov</p>
<p>Kcb_Dec</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Direct Additions

External estimates for important components of the water budget may be
supplied as supplemental grids or as table values. These additional
water sources may be applied to the soil-storage reservoir or added
directly as net infiltration. For both direct addition types, either
gridded or table data, may be supplied. SWB will always look for gridded
data first. If no gridded data are detected, SWB will look for table
values. Table values are expected to correspond to the land-use codes
contained in the main land-use grid.

Direct additions to net infiltration are processed after all other
water-balance components; therefore, little interaction is between these
terms and the rest of the model. Direct additions to soil moisture are
processed before net infiltration is calculated; therefore, direct
additions to soil moisture do affect the daily soil moisture amount and
the calculated net infiltration. The names of the terms themselves are
descriptive for the user; SWB processes them as additional water sources
to net infiltration or the soil-moisture storage reservoir.

The required control-file syntax and lookup-table entries for the
possible direct net-infiltration methods are listed in tables 3–20 and
3–21. The required control-file syntax and lookup-table entries for
the possible direct soil-moisture methods are listed in tables 3–22 and
3–23.

20. Direct net-infiltration additions control-file syntax.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— None</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>DIRECT_NET_INFILTRATION_METHOD NONE </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Direct net infiltration</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>DIRECT_NET_INFILTRATION_METHOD GRIDDED</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>CESSPOOL_LEAKAGE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>CESSPOOL_LEAKAGE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>STORM_DRAIN_LEAKAGE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>STORM_DRAIN_LEAKAGE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>DISPOSAL_WELL_DISCHARGE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>DISPOSAL_WELL_DISCHARGE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>WATER_BODY_LEAKAGE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>WATER_BODY_LEAKAGE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>ANNUAL_DIRECT_NET_INFILTRATION_RATE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>ANNUAL_DIRECT_NET_INFILTRATION_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

21. Direct net-infiltration additions lookup-table syntax.

| Field name (column name)          |
| --------------------------------- |
| Method— Gridded                   |
| cesspool\_leakage                 |
| storm\_drain\_leakage             |
| disposal\_well\_leakage           |
| water\_body\_leakage              |
| annual\_direct\_net\_infiltration |

22. Direct soil-moisture additions control-file syntax.

\[--, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Control-file syntax</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method— None</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>DIRECT_SOIL_MOISTURE_METHOD NONE </strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Method—Direct soil moisture</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>DIRECT_SOIL_MOISTURE_METHOD GRIDDED</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>DAILY_SEPTIC_DISCHARGE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>DAILY_SEPTIC_DISCHARGE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>ANNUAL_SEPTIC_DISCHARGE {grid type} {gridfile name}</p>
<p>ANNUAL_SEPTIC_DISCHARGE_PROJECTION_DEFINITION {PROJ4 string defining projection}</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

23. Direct soil-moisture additions lookup-table entries.

| Field name (column name)  |
| ------------------------- |
| Method—Gridded            |
| daily\_septic\_discharge  |
| annual\_septic\_discharge |

# Growing Degree Day

The calculation of the growing degree day depends on a number of
parameter values that define the way in which the calculation will
proceed. Specifically, the base and maximum temperatures may be
redefined, as well as the date on which to reset the growing degree-day
calculation. These lookup-table entries are optional. If these values
are not supplied, GDD\_base\_temperature is assumed to be 50 degrees
Fahrenheit, GDD\_maximum\_temperature is assumed to be 86 degrees
Fahrenheit, and the GDD\_reset\_date is assumed to be the first day in
January of each year. The required control-file syntax is listed in
table 3–24.

24. Growing degree-day lookup-table entries.

\[GDD, growing degree day\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Lookup-table entries</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Field name (column name)</td>
<td>Units</td>
<td>Data type</td>
<td>Dimension</td>
<td>Description</td>
<td>Notes</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>GDD_base_temperature</td>
<td>Degrees Fahrenheit</td>
<td>float</td>
<td>number of land-use codes</td>
<td>Base temperature from which to calculate GDD.</td>
<td>Default value is 50 degrees Fahrenheit.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>GDD_maximum_temperature</td>
<td>Degrees Fahrenheit</td>
<td>float</td>
<td>number of land-use codes</td>
<td>Maximum temperature for consideration in the GDD calculations.</td>
<td>Default value is 86 degrees Fahrenheit.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>GDD_reset_date</td>
<td><p>Day of year</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>date as month and day</p></td>
<td>integer or character</td>
<td>number of land-use codes</td>
<td>Day of year or month and day on which the accumulated GDD value is reset to zero.</td>
<td>Default reset date is the first day in January of each simulation year.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Growing Season

A control-file entry is not required for setting the growing-season
determination method. A method may be applied on a land-use by land-use
basis. If the day of year or date-based growing-season method is used
for a particular land use or crop type, the growing degree-day and end
of season air-temperature fields should be left blank. Conversely, if
the growing degree-day and end of season air-temperature fields contain
valid data, the start and end of growing-season date fields should be
left blank. The required lookup-table entries pertaining to the growing
season are listed in table 3–25.

25. Growing-season method lookup-table entries.

\[DOY, day of year; mm/dd, month/day; --, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Field name (column name)</th>
<th>Units</th>
<th>Data type</th>
<th>Dimension</th>
<th>Notes</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>growing_season_start</td>
<td><p>DOY</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>date as mm/dd</p></td>
<td>Integer or character</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>--</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>growing_season_end</td>
<td><p>DOY</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>date as mm/dd</p></td>
<td>Integer or character</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>--</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>GDD_growing_season_start</td>
<td>Degrees-Fahrenheit day</td>
<td>Float</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>--</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>air_temperature_growing_season_end</td>
<td>Degrees Fahrenheit</td>
<td>Float</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>--</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Irrigation Demand and Application

Irrigation demand and application calculations require several
additional parameters; the control-file syntax and lookup-table entries
are listed in tables 3–26 and 3–27.

26. Irrigation-method control-file entries.

\[FAO–56, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Paper
No. 56 (Allen and others, 1998); --, no entry\]

| Control-file syntax           |
| ----------------------------- |
| Method— Curve number          |
| **IRRIGATION\_METHOD FAO–56** |

27. Irrigation-method lookup-table entries.

\[DOY, day of year; mm/dd, month/day; MAD, maximum allowable depletion;
FAO–56, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Paper
No. 56 (Allen and others, 1998); --, no entry\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Field name (column name)</th>
<th>Units</th>
<th>Data type</th>
<th>Dimension</th>
<th>Notes</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>irrigation_start</td>
<td><p>DOY</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>date as mm/dd</p></td>
<td>Integer or character string</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>First DOY or mm/dd on which to consider application of irrigation water.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>irrigation_end</td>
<td><p>DOY</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>date as mm/dd</p></td>
<td>Integer or character string</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>Last DOY or mm/dd on which to consider application of irrigation water.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>irrigation_application_efficency</td>
<td>Unitless</td>
<td>Float</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>Efficiency with which irrigation water is delivered and applied. The irrigation-application method determines the effect that this number has on the calculated irrigation amounts.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>maximum_allowable_depletion</td>
<td>Unitless</td>
<td>Float</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>MAD is the amount of depletion of plant available water tolerable before irrigation water is applied. This value is often the same as the depletion_fraction defined in the FAO–56 available water-capacity modules, but does not need to be the same.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>monthly_irrigation_schedule</td>
<td>--</td>
<td>Integer or character string</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td>This field is used to define a predetermined monthly irrigation application schedule. A 0 indicates no irrigation on that day of the month; a 1 indicates that irrigation will take place. An irrigation schedule specifying that irrigation take place approximately every fourth day would look something like: 10001000100010001000100010000.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>irrigation_application_scheme</td>
<td>--</td>
<td>Character string</td>
<td>Number of land-use codes</td>
<td><p>This field is used to specify the irrigation application scheme for a given land use or crop type. Irrigation water is applied when the soil-moisture deficit within the current root zone exceeds the maximum_allowable_depletion. When the MAD is exceeded, irrigation water is applied using one of the following five schemes:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>field_capacity_original–the soil-moisture deficit is completely eliminated; soil within the root zone is restored to field capacity; water that is delivered inefficiently is added directly to the soil-moisture reservoir</p></li>
<li><p>field_capacity–the soil-moisture deficit is completely eliminated; soil within the root zone is restored to field capacity; water that is delivered inefficiently is considered lost to the mass balance</p></li>
<li><p>defined_deficit–the soil-moisture deficit is reduced until the deficit is equal to or less than the deficit_irrigation_fraction</p></li>
<li><p>constant_amount–a constant, defined amount of irrigation water is applied regardless of whether or not this results in net infiltration</p></li>
<li><p>monthly_demand_based–irrigation water is applied on a scheduled monthly basis in proportion to the difference between the monthly rainfall and potential evapotranspiration amounts.</p></li>
</ul></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#   

# Rejected Net Infiltration

Rejected net-infiltration amounts, if specified, must be given for each
combination of land use and soil type (table 3–28).

28. Rejected net-infiltration lookup-table
entries.

| Field name (column name) | Units | Data type | Dimension                                         | Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| ------------------------ | ----- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| max\_net\_infil\_\#      | Inch  | Float     | Number of land-use codes x number of soils groups | A maximum net-infiltration rate may be specified for each combination of land uses and soils groups. If the user chooses to use this feature, the same number of maximum net-infiltration columns must be specified as numbers of soils groups. Thus, if a given set of inputs encompasses four soils groups, the following four columns of max\_net\_infil should be given: max\_net\_infil\_1, max\_net\_infil\_2, max\_net\_infil\_3, and max\_net\_infil\_4. |

# References Cited

Allen, R.G., Pereira, L.S., Raes, Dirk, and Smith, Martin, 1998, Crop
evapotranspiration—Guidelines for computing crop water requirements:
Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, FAO
Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 56, 174 p.

Horton, R.E., 1919, Rainfall interception: Albany, N.Y., Monthly Weather
Review, v. 47, no. 9, p. 608, p. 603–623, accessed September 6, 2017, at
ftp://ftp.library.noaa.gov/docs.lib/htdocs/rescue/mwr/047/mwr-047-09-0603.pdf.
