Appendix 1. Method Documentation

Each of the hydrologic processes that are part of the water budget can
be simulated in one or more ways; Soil-Water-Balance (SWB) has a
collection of methods that implement the processes included in the water
budget. The user may select which method to use depending on which is
most applicable to the problem at hand. The approach and implementation
of the SWB methods are described in appendix 1. Methods that read in
tabular or gridded datasets are not described in appendix 1; use of
tabular or gridded data with SWB is discussed in the user guide
(appendix 2).

Precipitation
=============

Precipitation data may be supplied to SWB in gridded or tabular form or
may be estimated using the method of fragments. Only the method of
fragments is discussed in appendix 1.

In the method of fragments module, daily rainfall for each grid cell is
generated by use of a combination of monthly gridded rainfall datasets
and a set of discrete point observations. First, fragments are generated
by dividing each daily rainfall observation at a point for a particular
month by the total rainfall measured at the gage for that month. This
method results in a set of fragments for that particular month in which
the total number of fragments is equal to the number of days in the
month, and for which the sum of the fragment values equals one. Thiessen
polygons are developed from the network of viable rainfall gages within
the model domain and are used to develop a set of rainfall zones (fig.
1–1). Thus, for each of the rainfall zones, a set of monthly fragment
values is developed; the number of distinct fragment sets at a gage is
about equal to the number of years the gage has been in operation. A
partial set of fragments that might be generated for an arbitrary month
is listed in table 1–1. A similar set of tables must be generated for
each month in the year.

1.  Example of fragment sets for an arbitrary month associated with a
    rainfall gage.

\[n, the number of complete months for which daily rainfall data are
available; \* \* \*, omitted values\]

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Fragment set   Day of the month
  -------------- ------------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------
                 1                  2          3          ...        31

  1              0.01               0.07       0.03                  0.04

  2              0.02               0.05       0.02                  0.02

  \* \* \*       \* \* \*           \* \* \*   \* \* \*   \* \* \*   \* \* \*

  n              0.03               0.06       0.04                  0.03
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Daily rainfall for a particular cell within a given month is synthesized
by multiplying total gridded-rainfall amount for that month by the daily
fragment value. The daily fragment values are extracted from one of the
available fragment sets associated with a rainfall gage; the particular
fragment set is chosen at random at the beginning of each month of the
simulation (fig. 1–1).

1.  Example of synthetic daily rainfall generation for a specific
    rainfall zone.

The SWB model grid is divided into rainfall zones, and an integer-grid
file that contains the rainfall zone numbers is loaded into the model
during initialization. An example of this integer-grid file is in the
set of digital files associated with appendix 4. Each rainfall zone
represents an area in which a rainfall gage has operated for several
consecutive years; at each zone, the observed daily values possibly can
be used to create a rainfall-fragment set. The calculated rainfall
supplied to SWB takes on the correct total monthly rainfall amount (from
the grid), whereas the timing and magnitude of daily events is taken
from an actual sequence of events as contained in the fragment set.

Interception
============

Interception of rain or snow by vegetation is an important part of the
water budget; estimates of interception as a percentage of total
precipitation range from 20 to 50 percent in some forested areas
(Savenije, 2004). The three interception methods included in SWB are
bucket, Gash, and Horton.

Bucket
------

The bucket method of interception is the original interception process
method that was coded into SWB. The bucket method assumes that a
constant, user-defined amount of rainfall or snowfall must fall before
the soil will receive any precipitation.

Gash
----

Another option in SWB for calculating canopy interception is a modified
version of the method described by Gash (1979). Using this approach,
canopy evaporation for a given day and location depends on forest
structure and the mean rates of evaporation and precipitation. The Gash
method was modified so that (1) precipitation includes rainfall and fog
interception, instead of rain only and (2) water cannot be stored on the
forest canopy for more than a day (Izuka and others, 2010). The forest
structure is characterized in terms of canopy cover, canopy capacity,
trunk-storage capacity, and the proportion of precipitation diverted to
stemflow. Canopy cover, *c*, is the fraction of a forested area that is
covered by leaves, stems, and branches of trees. Canopy capacity, *S*,
is the depth of water left on the canopy when rainfall and throughfall
have ceased (Gash and Morton, 1978). Evaporation of water from tree
trunks is accounted for using the fraction of precipitation that is
diverted to stemflow, *p*, and trunk-storage capacity, *k*, which is
considered in terms of an equivalent depth of precipitation. The last
parameter needed for the Gash model is the ratio of the mean evaporation
rate to the mean precipitation rate during saturated conditions, *V*.

To calculate canopy interception, the first step is to determine the
minimum depth of precipitation necessary to saturate the forest canopy,
*P<sub>sat</sub>*. Forest canopy is calculated as

@f${P_{sat}} = - {S \over {c \cdot V}}\\ln \left( {1 - V}
\right)@f$

where

*P<sub>sat</sub>* is precipitation necessary to saturate the canopy, in
inches;

*S* is canopy storage capacity, in inches (a constant);

*c* is fraction of ground area covered by canopy (dimensionless);

*V* is ratio of mean evaporation rate to mean precipitation rate during
saturated conditions (dimensionless).

On the basis of the revised analytical form of the Gash model presented
in table 1 of Gash and others (1995), canopy interception for a given
day, *I*, is calculated for three canopy conditions as listed in table
1–2.

1.  Equations for calculating canopy interception for various
    precipitation conditions.

\[*$k$*, trunk storage capacity \[L\] (a constant); *$p$*, proportion of
precipitation diverted to stemflow (dimensionless); *$c$*, fraction of
ground surface covered by vegetative canopy (dimensionless); *$V$*,
ratio of mean evaporation rate to mean precipitation rate
(dimensionless); *$P$*, total daily precipitation (inches);
*${P\_{sat}}$*, precipitation amount required to fully saturate the
forest canopy; *$I$*, canopy interception (inches) \]

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Condition                                             Interception calculation
  ----------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *$P &lt; {P\_{sat}}$*                                 *$I = c \\cdot P$*

  *$P \\ge {P\_{sat}}$* and *$$P \\le {k \\over p}$$*   *$I = c \\cdot {P\_{sat}} + c \\cdot V \\cdot \\left( {P - {P\_{sat}}} \\right) + p \\cdot P$*

  *$P \\ge {P\_{sat}}$* and *$P &gt; {k \\over p}$*     *$I = c \\cdot {P\_{sat}} + c \\cdot V \\cdot \\left( {P - {P\_{sat}}} \\right) + k$*
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Advantages of the Gash method are as follows: (1) the method accounts
for gaps in the forest canopy, which allows for a sparse canopy to be
differentiated from a dense canopy; (2) the canopy interception during a
period of precipitation is dependent on the amount of precipitation
during that period; and (3) the method can account for spatial
differences in climate. Disadvantages of the Gash model are that the
method is theoretical and may be difficult to parameterize.

Horton
------

Robert Horton made countless observations of various hydrological
processes at his hydrologic laboratory in the early 1900s, including
observations of canopy interception. The Horton model begins with a
bucket that must be filled regardless of total storm volume and adds a
linear relation that produces an increasing canopy interception value
proportional to increasing storm volume (Horton, 1919). Some of Horton’s
working equations that are based on his analysis of rainfall and
interception are listed in table 1–3. These relations represent an
improvement from the bucket model approach, which does not consider the
total daily precipitation.

1.  Horton's working equations for estimating intercepted rainfall.

\[*$I$*, interception, in inches; *${P\_s}$*, precipitation received
during a storm event, in inches; *$h$*, plant height, in feet\]

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Vegetation type                                            Working equation
  ---------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  Orchard                                                    *$I = 0.04 + 0.18{P\_s}$*

  Chestnut, hedge and open                                   *$I = 0.04 + 0.20{P\_s}$*

  Chestnut, in woods                                         *$I = 0.06 + 0.15{P\_s}$*

  Ash, hedges and open                                       *$I = 0.015 + 0.23{P\_s}$*

  Ash, in woods                                              *$I = 0.02 + 0.18{P\_s}$*

  Beech, hedges and open                                     *$I = 0.03 + 0.23{P\_s}$*

  Beech, woods                                               *$I = 0.04 + 0.18{P\_s}$*

  Oak, hedges and open                                       *$I = 0.03 + 0.22{P\_s}$*

  Oak, woods                                                 *$I = 0.05 + 0.18{P\_s}$*

  Maple, hedges and open                                     *$I = 0.03 + 0.23{P\_s}$*

  Maple, woods                                               *$I = 0.04 + 0.18{P\_s}$*

  Willow shrubs                                              *$I = 0.02 + 0.4{P\_s}$*

  Elm, hedges and open                                       *$I = 0.03 + 0.23P\_S^{0.5}$*

  Elm, woods                                                 *$I = 0.04 + 0.18P\_S^{0.5}$*

  Basswood, hedges and open                                  *$I = 0.03 + 0.13P\_S^{0.5}$*

  Basswood, woods                                            *$I = 0.05 + 0.1P\_S^{0.5}$*

  Hemlock and pine, hedges and open                          *$I = 0.03 + 0.2P\_S^{0.5}$*

  Hemlock and pine, woods                                    *$I = 0.05 + 0.2P\_S^{0.5}$*

  Clover and meadow grass                                    *$I = \\left( {0.005 + 0.08{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Forage, alfalfa, vetch, millet, etc.                       *$I = \\left( {0.01 + 0.1{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Beans, potatoes, cabbage, and other small-hilled crops     *$I = \\left( {0.02 + 0.15{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Tobacco                                                    *$I = \\left( {0.01 + 0.08{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Cotton                                                     *$I = \\left( {0.015 + 0.1{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Buckwheat                                                  *$I = \\left( {0.01 + 0.12{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Corn, planted in hills or rows                             *$I = \\left( {0.005 + 0.005{P\_S}} \\right)h$*

  Fodder corn, sorghum, Kaffir corn, etc., sowed in drills   *$I = \\left( {0.007 + 0.006{P\_S}} \\right)h$*
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To use Horton’s working equations in an SWB simulation, the user must
supply the constant, slope, and exponent as given in table 1–3. No
attempt is made to incorporate plant height; the user must modify the
equation with the approximate plant height. Thus, the equation for
8-foot corn would be *I=(0.005 + 0.08P<sub>s</sub>)∙8 = 0.04 +
0.04P<sub>s</sub>*; the constant, slope, and exponent supplied to SWB
would be 0.04, 0.04, and 1.0, respectively.

Snowfall
--------

Snow is allowed to accumulate or melt, or both on a daily basis. The
daily mean, maximum, and minimum air temperatures are used to determine
whether precipitation takes the form of rain or snow. Precipitation that
falls on a day when the mean temperature minus one-third the difference
between the daily high and low temperatures is less than or equal to the
freezing point of water is considered to fall as snow (Westenbroek and
others, 2010):

$$\begin{equation}
\begin{array}{*{20}{c}}
{snow:}&amp;{{T_{mean}} - \frac{1}{3}\left( {{T_{max}} - T_{min}^{}} \right) \le 32}\\
{rain:}&amp;{{T_{mean}} - \frac{1}{3}\left( {{T_{max}} - T_{min}^{}} \right)&gt;32}
\end{array}
\end{equation}$$

where

${T_{mean}}$ is the mean daily air temperature, in degrees
Fahrenheit;

*${T\_{max}}$* is the daily maximum air temperatures, in degrees
Fahrenheit; and

*${T\_{min}}$* is the daily minimum air temperatures, in degrees
Fahrenheit.

Snowmelt and Ice Jams
--------

Snowmelt is based on a temperature-index method. In the SWB code, the
assumption is that 1.5 millimeters (0.059 inch) of water-equivalent snow
melts per day per degree Celsius that the daily maximum temperature is
above the freezing point (Dripps and Bradbury, 2007):

$$potential\;snowmelt = 0.059 \cdot \left( {{T_{max}} - 32}
\right)$$ (1–3)

where

*${T\_{max}}$* is the daily maximum air temperatures, in degrees
Fahrenheit.

Fog Interception
----------------

Fog interception is not explicitly modeled within SWB, but estimates of
fog interception may be supplied by means of externally generated grid
files. For pilot application of SWB to Maui, Hawaii, a set of external
grids were developed. These grids express the intercepted fog amounts as
a fraction of the monthly observed rainfall amounts. The process
involves a grid computation using the aspect, elevation, and mean
monthly rainfall combined with table values of estimated annual
fog-interception rates to yield monthly fog-interception grids expressed
as a fraction of monthly rainfall amounts. More details on this external
fog calculation are in appendix 4, along with example input files.

Runoff
======

Runoff may be calculated by means of the Natural Resources Conservation
Service curve number method or may be related to precipitation values as
a set of user-defined ratios. This section describes both methods.

Curve Number
------------

The curve number method defines runoff in relation to the difference
between precipitation and an initial abstraction term. Conceptually,
this initial abstraction term represents the summation of all processes
that might act to reduce runoff, including interception by plants and
fallen leaves, depression storage, and infiltration (Woodward and
others, 2003). Equation 1–4 is used to calculate runoff volumes
(Woodward and others, 2003):

*$R = {{{{(P - {I\_a})}^2}} \\over {\\left( {P + \\left\[ {{S\_{max}} -
{I\_a}} \\right\]} \\right)}}$* (1–4)

where

*$R$* is runoff, in inches;

*$P$* is daily precipitation, in inches;

*${I\_a}$* is initial abstraction, in inches, the amount of
precipitation that must fall before runoff is generated; and

*${S\_{max}}$* is the maximum soil-moisture holding capacity, in inches.

In the original curve number methodology, the initial abstraction term
is assumed to be *I<sub>a</sub> = 0.2S<sub>max</sub>*; SWB modifies the
initial abstraction term to that indicated in equation 1–5. The initial
abstraction (*I<sub>a</sub>*) term is related to a maximum storage term
(*S<sub>max</sub>*) as follows:

*${I\_a} = 0.05{S\_{max}}$* (1–5)

where

*${I\_a}$* is initial abstraction, in langleys, the amount of
precipitation that must fall before runoff is generated; and

*${S\_{max}}$* is the maximum soil-moisture holding capacity, in
langleys.

This modification implies that runoff will begin for smaller
precipitation events than with the original method; this change has been
determined to result in more realistic continuous simulations (Woodward
and others, 2003).

The maximum storage term, in inches, is defined by the curve number for
the land cover and infiltration capacity that is being considered:

> *${S\_{max}} = \\left( {{{1,000} \\over {CN}}} \\right) - 10$* (1–6)

where

*${S\_{max}}$* is the maximum soil-moisture holding capacity, in inches;
and

*CN* is the curve number.

For convenience, the curve number method assigns all soils surveyed in
the United States into one of four groups (A, B, C, D) on a continuum
ranging from A soils, which represent porous soils of high infiltration
capacity, to D soils, which represent fine textured soils of low
infiltration capacity (Hawkins and others, 2009). Assumed
characteristics of the four standard hydrologic soil groups are listed
in table 1–4.

1.  Characteristic and texture classes for the hydrologic soil groups.

\[From Hawkins and others (2009). &gt;, greater than; &lt;, less than\]

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Hydrologic soil group   Characteristics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Texture                                                       Infiltration rate (inches per hour)
  ----------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------
  A                       Low runoff potential and high infiltration rates, consisting primarily of deep, well- to excessively-drained sand or gravel.                                                                                                                                          Sand, loamy sand, sandy loam                                  &gt;0.30

  B                       Moderate infiltration rates when wetted consisting of moderately deep to deep, moderately well-drained to well-drained soils of moderately fine to coarse texture.                                                                                                    Silt loam or loam                                             0.15–0.30

  C                       Low infiltration rates when wetted consisting primarily of (1) soils that have an underlying layer impeding downward movement of water and (2) soils with moderately fine to fine texture.                                                                            Sandy clay loam                                               0.05–0.15

  D                       Very low infiltration rates and high runoff potential when wetted, consisting primarily of clay soils with (1) high swelling potential, (2) high permanent water table, (3) clay or claypan near the surface, or (4) shallow soils over nearly impervious material.   Clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay   &lt;0.05
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Curve numbers are user-defined; a separate curve number is supplied in
the SWB lookup table for each combination of land use and hydrologic
soil group. Curve numbers can range from 0 to 100, but the useful range
of curve numbers is far less depending on the hydrologic soil group. The
range of typical curve numbers for the four hydrologic soil groups are
listed in table 1–5; these values should be considered when assigning
curve numbers to the various land-use categories included in an SWB
lookup table.

1.  Range of typical curve numbers for the hydrologic soil groups.

\[From Hawkins and others (2009)\]

  -----------------------------------------------------
  Hydrologic soil group   Minimum   Central   Maximum
  ----------------------- --------- --------- ---------
  A                       25        51–68     77

  B                       48        62–77     86

  C                       65        70–84     91

  D                       73        77–88     94
  -----------------------------------------------------

Equations 1–5 and 1–6 can be used to back calculate the implied initial
abstraction values associated with the curve number ranges listed in
table 1–5. For a D soil, the maximum storage term (Smax) ranges from
about 0.63 to 3.7 inches. Use of an initial abstraction term of
0.05*S*<sub>max</sub> as suggested by Woodward and others (2003) implies
that between 0.03 and 0.18 inch of precipitation must fall before runoff
begins. For an A soil, the maximum storage term ranges from 3.0 to
30 inches, which implies that between 0.15 and 1.5 inches of
precipitation must fall before runoff begins.

### Published Curve Numbers

An attractive feature of the curve number method is that published
tables of curve numbers exist that serve as useful starting values for
use in the SWB lookup tables. A subset of the values published with one
of the curve number method publications (Cronshey and others, 1986) is
listed in table 1–6; curve numbers for more land uses are given in the
original publication along with details regarding appropriate choice and
application of those curve numbers. Other researchers may have published
curve numbers applicable to vegetation types not included in the
official publications; researchers have published curve numbers intended
for application to specific areas such as rangelands of the northern
plains of the United States (Hanson and others, 1981), croplands in the
southern plains of the United States (Hauser and Jones, 1991), and
pineapple and sugarcane fields in Hawaii (Cooley and Lane, 1982).

1.  Recommended initial curve numbers for select land uses and
    hydrologic soil groups.

\[From Cronshey and others, 1986. &lt;, less than; &gt;, greater than;
--, no data\]

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Cover description    Curve numbers for hydrologic soil group
  -------------------- --------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---- ---- ---- ----
  Land use             Specifics                                                 Hydrologic condition                                                           A    B    C    D

  Open space           Lawns, parks, golf courses, cemeteries                    Poor (grass cover &lt;50 percent)                                              68   79   86   89

                                                                                 Fair (grass cover 50 percent to 75 percent)                                    49   69   79   84

                                                                                 Good (grass cover &gt;75 percent)                                              39   61   74   80

  Impervious areas     Paved parking lots, rooftops, driveways                   --                                                                             98   98   98   98

                       Paved streets and roads—with curb and gutter              --                                                                             98   98   98   98

                       Paved streets and roads—with open ditches                 --                                                                             83   89   92   93

                       Gravel road                                               --                                                                             76   85   89   91

  Urban                Commercial and business                                   --                                                                             89   92   94   95

                       Industrial                                                --                                                                             81   88   91   93

  Residential          Lot size is &lt; 1/8 acre                                 --                                                                             77   85   90   92

                       Lot size is 1/8 to 1/4 acre                               --                                                                             61   75   83   87

                       Lot size is 1/4 to 1/3 acre                               --                                                                             57   72   81   86

                       Lot size is 1/3 to 1/2 acre                               --                                                                             54   70   80   85

                       Lot size is 1/2 to 1 acre                                 --                                                                             51   68   79   84

                       Lot size is 1 to 2 acres                                  --                                                                             46   65   77   82

  Newly graded areas   Pervious areas only, no vegetation                        --                                                                             77   86   91   94

  Fallow               Bare soil                                                 --                                                                             77   86   91   94

                       Crop residue cover                                        Poor                                                                           76   85   90   93

                                                                                 Good                                                                           74   83   88   90

  Row crops            Straight row                                              Poor                                                                           72   81   88   91

                                                                                 Good                                                                           67   78   85   89

                       Straight row plus crop residue                            Poor                                                                           71   80   87   90

                                                                                 Good                                                                           64   75   82   85

                       Contoured                                                 Poor                                                                           70   79   84   88

                                                                                 Good                                                                           65   75   82   86

                       Contoured plus crop residue cover                         Poor                                                                           69   78   83   87

                                                                                 Good                                                                           64   74   81   85

                       Contoured and terraced                                    Poor                                                                           66   74   80   82

                                                                                 Good                                                                           62   71   78   81

                       Contoured and terraced plus crop residue cover            Poor                                                                           65   73   79   81

                                                                                 Good                                                                           61   70   77   80

  Small grain          Straight row                                              Poor                                                                           65   76   84   88

                                                                                 Good                                                                           63   75   83   87

                       Straight row plus crop residue                            Poor                                                                           64   75   83   86

                                                                                 Good                                                                           60   72   80   84

                       Contoured                                                 Poor                                                                           63   74   82   85

                                                                                 Good                                                                           61   73   81   84

                       Contoured plus crop residue cover                         Poor                                                                           62   73   81   84

                                                                                 Good                                                                           60   72   80   83

                       Contoured and terraced                                    Poor                                                                           61   72   79   82

                                                                                 Good                                                                           59   70   78   81

                       Contoured and terraced plus crop residue cover            Poor                                                                           60   71   78   81

                                                                                 Good                                                                           58   69   77   80

  Pasture, grassland   Continuous forage for grazing                             Poor (&lt;50 percent ground cover or heavily grazed with no mulch)             68   79   86   89

                                                                                 Fair (50 percent to 75 percent ground cover and not heavily grazed)            49   69   79   84

                                                                                 Good (&gt;75 percent ground cover and only lightly grazed)                     39   61   74   80

  Meadow               Continuous grass, protected from grazing, mowed for hay   --                                                                             30   58   71   78

  Brush                Brush-weed-grass mixture, with brush the major element    Poor (&lt;50 percent ground cover)                                             48   67   77   83

                                                                                 Fair (50 percent to 75 percent ground cover)                                   35   56   70   77

                                                                                 Good (&gt;75 percent ground cover)                                             30   48   65   73

  Woods                                                                          Poor (litter, small trees and brush destroyed by grazing or regular burning)   45   66   77   83

                                                                                 Fair (woods are grazed but not burned; some forest litter present)             36   60   73   79

                                                                                 Good (woods protected from grazing; liter and brush adequately cover soil)     30   55   70   77
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Antecedent Runoff Conditions

SWB adjusts the user-specified curve numbers upward or downward
depending on how much precipitation has fallen in the previous 5-day
period. The amount of precipitation that has fallen in the previous
5-day period is used to describe soil-moisture conditions; three classes
of moisture conditions are defined and are called antecedent runoff
condition I, II, and III (table 1–7). The base (user-defined) curve
numbers are assumed to represent antecedent runoff condition II.

1.  Antecedent runoff conditions.

\[Nongrowing season and growing season antecedent runoff conditions are
given in inches\]

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Runoff condition number   Description       Nongrowing season   Growing season
  ------------------------- ----------------- ------------------- ----------------
  I                         Dry               0.05                1.4

  II                        Average           0.5–1.1             1.4–2.1

  III                       Near saturation   1.1                 2.1
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For example, assume that in the previous 5 days 1 inch of precipitation
fell on a grid cell; the runoff condition number would be I, and the
runoff curve number would be adjusted down from the base (user-supplied)
value. As another example, if a 5-day total of 1.5 inches of
precipitation were to fall on a grid cell, the antecedent runoff
condition would be III, and the curve number would be adjusted upwards
from the base (user-supplied) value.

If the soils are nearly saturated, as in antecedent runoff condition
III, the curve number for a grid cell is adjusted upward from antecedent
runoff condition II (eq. 1–7) to account for generally higher runoff
amounts observed when precipitation falls on saturated soil (Mishra and
Singh, 2003):

*$$C{N\_{ARC(III)}} = {{C{N\_{ARC(II)}}} \\over {\\left( {0.427 +
0.00573 \\times C{N\_{ARC(II)}}} \\right)}}$$* (1–7)

where

*CN* is the curve number,

*ARC(III)* is the antecedent runoff condition III, and

*ARCII* is the antecedent runoff condition II.

Conversely, when soils are dry, as in antecedent runoff condition I,
curve numbers are adjusted downward from antecedent runoff condition II
(eq. 1–8) in an attempt to reflect the increased infiltration rates of
dry soils (Mishra and Singh, 2003).

*$C{N\_{ARC(I)}} = {{C{N\_{ARC(II)}}} \\over {\\left( {2.281 - 0.01281
\\times C{N\_{ARC(II)}}} \\right)}}$* (1–8)

where

*CN* is the curve number,

*ARC(I)* is the antecedent runoff condition I, and

*ARCII* is the antecedent runoff condition II.

Between dry and nearly saturated conditions is antecedent runoff
condition II, which represents an average rainfall-runoff relation for
moderate soil-moisture conditions.

### Continuous Frozen Ground Index (CFGI)

Runoff from frozen ground is simulated by adjusting the base curve
numbers toward antecedent runoff condition III when frozen ground
conditions exist. Frozen ground conditions are tracked by use of a
continuous frozen ground index (CFGI; Molnau and Bissell, 1983):

*$CFG{I\_i} = A \\cdot CFG{I\_{i - 1}} - T \\cdot {e^{( - 0.4 \\cdot K
\\cdot D)}}\\quad \\ge 0$* (1–9)

where

*CFGI<sub>i</sub>* is continuous frozen ground index on the current day,
in Celsius degree days;

*A* is daily decay coefficient, unitless;

*CFGI<sub>i-1\ </sub>* is continuous frozen ground index on the previous
day, in Celsius degree days;

*T* is daily mean air temperature, in degrees Celsius;

*K* is snow reduction coefficient, per centimeter; and

*D* is depth of snow on ground, in centimeters.

The values for the coefficients *A* and *K* are defined in the same
manner as described by Molnau and Bissel (1983):
*K*=0.5<sup>-centimeter</sup> for above-freezing periods,
*K*=0.08<sup>-centimeter</sup> for below-freezing periods, and *A*=0.97.
During conditions of no snow cover, the CFGI represents the running sum
by which the average air temperature deviates from the freezing point of
water; snow conditions cause the CFGI to grow or shrink at a slower
rate.

The CFGI is applied by allowing for a transition range to be applied
through which runoff enhancement ranges from negligible to strong
(Molnau and Bissell, 1983).

In the SWB code, a probability of runoff enhancement factor*,
P<sub>f</sub>* , is used to linearly interpolate between the curve
numbers at antecedent runoff condition II and antecedent runoff
condition III; *P<sub>f</sub>* is defined as given in equation 1–10.

*${P\_f} = {\\textstyle{{CFGI - LL} \\over {UL - LL}}}$* (1–10)

where

*P<sub>f</sub>* is the probability that runoff will be enhanced by
frozen ground conditions;

*CFGI* is continuous frozen ground index, in Celsius degree days;

*UL* is the upper limit of the *CFGI*, above which frozen ground
conditions exist, in Celsius degree days; and

*LL* is the lower limit of the *CFGI*, below which frozen ground
conditions do not exist, in Celsius degree days.

If no values are assigned for *$LL$* and *$UL$*, default values of 9999
are assigned to both, effectively disabling the CFGI option; this
behavior is unchanged from SWB version 1.0. If the CFGI option is used,
Molnau and Bissel (1983) recommend starting with a value of 83 Celsius
degree days for the upper limit and a value of 56 Celsius degree days
for the lower limit. These values were developed for the Pacific
Northwestern United States and may not be applicable elsewhere.

Monthly Runoff Fraction Grid
----------------------------

Grids containing monthly runoff ratios relative to precipitation may be
used instead of the curve number approach. A series of grids may be
supplied as discussed in the user guide in appendix 2.

Impervious Surface Runoff
=========================

Runoff from impervious surfaces may be simulated in a more detailed
manner by including a gridded dataset defining the proportion of each
grid cell that is comprised of impervious materials. Data may be
supplied as either a fraction (0.0–1.0) or percentage (0–100 percent) of
either pervious or impervious surface area.

Any cell that is assigned an impervious surface fraction or percent that
is greater than zero will operate in a fundamentally different way than
in original SWB code; in these cells, mass-balance calculations will be
performed on an additional impervious surface storage reservoir (fig.
1–2), the capacity of which is determined by the impervious surface
rainfall-retention depth.

1.  Conceptual diagram showing treatment of impervious surface runoff.

For grid cells with impervious surfaces, a temporary impervious storage
amount is determined using the following conditions:

*$$imperv\\\_sto{r\_{temp}} = rainfall + snowmelt + imperv\\\_sto{r\_{t
- 1}} - evap\\\_imperv$$* (1–11)

where

*imperv\_stor<sub>temp</sub>* is the temporary impervious storage
amount,

*$rainfall$* is the daily rainfall amount,

*$snowmelt$* is the daily snowmelt amount,

*$imperv\\\_sto{r\_{t - 1}}$* is the previous days’ impervious storage
amount, and

*$evap\\\_imperv$* is the daily evaporation of water from the impervious
surface.

The final amount of water stored in the impervious storage reservoir is
dependent on the value of *imperv\_stor<sub>temp</sub>*. The values of
the daily ending impervious storage amount and the impervious storage
excess are calculated as listed in table 1–8 depending on whether the
temporary impervious storage amount is less than or greater than the
maximum impervious storage amount.

1.  Equations for determining impervious surface storage and impervious
    surface excess.

\[*imperv\_stor<sub>t</sub>*, daily ending impervious storage amount, in
inches; *imperv\_stor<sub>temp</sub>*, temporary impervious storage
amount, in inches; *imperv\_stor<sub>max</sub>*, maximum impervious
storage amount in inches; *f*, ratio of impervious surface fraction to
the pervious surface fraction (dimensionless); *imperv\_frac*, fraction
of the grid cell covered by impervious surfaces (dimensionless)\]

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Condition</th>
<th>Value of <em>imperv_stor<sub>t</sub></em></th>
<th>Value of <em>imperv_stor<sub>excess</sub></em></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>$imperv\_sto{r_{temp}} \le imperv\_sto{r_{max}}$</em></td>
<td><em>$imperv\_sto{r_{temp}}$</em></td>
<td>Zero</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><em>$imperv\_sto{r_{temp}} &gt; imperv\_sto{r_{max}}$</em></td>
<td><em>$imperv\_sto{r_{max}}$</em></td>
<td><p><em>$$\eqalign{</em></p>
<p><em>&amp; \left( {imperv\_sto{r_{temp}} - imperv\_sto{r_{max}}} \right) \cdot f \cr </em></p>
<p><em>&amp; {\rm{where}} \cr </em></p>
<p><em>&amp; f = \left( {{{imperv\_frac} \over {1 - imperv\_frac}}} \right) \cr} $$</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The resulting impervious surface excess is distributed to the pervious
fraction of the cell or is directed to a storm sewer for immediate
removal of the surface excess from the model domain. Specifying a
storm-drain capture fraction greater than zero will result in that
fraction of impervious surface excess being diverted and extracted from
the model domain. The model default is zero, or no, storm-drain capture
and zero, or no, fraction impervious surface. The storm-drain capture
fraction may be supplied in a lookup table or in gridded form.

Runoff Routing
==============

SWB allows excess water generated at a grid cell to flow to the next
downslope cell using a D8 flow-routing scheme to define the linkages
between cells. Activation of the overland flow-routing method within SWB
allows runoff from one or more cells to become run-on to downslope
cells. All runoff from a cell is assumed to infiltrate in downslope
cells or be routed out of the model domain on the same day in which the
runoff originated as rainfall or snowmelt. Runoff flow routing may be
disabled and also may be configured such that only some fraction of
runoff is routed to the downslope cell.

During model initialization, SWB examines the connectivity between each
active cell. Based on this connectivity, SWB creates a master list of
cell identifications and sorts them from upslope to downslope. When the
model solution is calculated each day, the code begins with the cell
furthest upslope, performs all mass-balance calculations, and then
proceeds to perform the same calculation on the next cell in the list.

Connectivity is defined on the basis of an input D8 flow-direction grid;
this is a scheme by which connections between cells are encoded as an
integer value within the flow-direction grid (O’Callaghan and Mark,
1984), with flow directions defined as shown in figure 1–3*B*. The
original algorithm assigns a unique flow direction to each grid cell by
determining the steepest slope between the central cell and its eight
neighboring cells. For the cells shown in figure 1–3*A*, the steepest
descent algorithm results in flow from the central cell to the
southwest; the corresponding cell figure 1–3*B*, located to the
southwest of the central cell, contains the number 8. By convention,
therefore, the D8 flow direction for the cell shown in figure 1–3*A* is
8.

1.  Examples of A, elevation grid values, in meters and B, resulting D8
    flow-direction encoding.

Once water is routed to a closed surface depression and
evapotranspiration and soil-moisture demands are met, the only loss
mechanism is net infiltration. The simplified nature of the flow routing
results in cases where maximum net-infiltration values of hundreds or
thousands of inches per year are calculated. These values are
unrealistic and likely result from the simplified treatment of overland
flow routing. SWB allows the user to enter a maximum recharge rate for
each land cover and soil group combination. This feature offers a way to
restrict the estimated net-infiltration values to a more reasonable
range; however, the rejected net infiltration, nonetheless, is removed
from the model domain on the same day in which the net infiltration
originated as precipitation or snowmelt.

If desired, only a fraction of the calculated runoff can be routed
downslope. A user-specified routing fraction grid may be specified in
order to split runoff between RUNOFF\_OUTSIDE (in other words, assumed
to join a surface-water feature and exit the model grid) and inflow to
the next downslope cell. For cases in which flow routing is undesirable,
the runoff flow routing routine may be disabled altogether.

Potential/Reference Evapotranspiration
======================================

Thornthwaite (1948) classified the world's climate and observed that
"...there is a distinction...between the amount of water that actually
transpires and evaporates and that which would transpire and evaporate
if it were available.” When water supply increases, as in a desert
irrigation project, evapotranspiration rises to a maximum that depends
only on the climate. This we may call ‘potential evapotranspiration,’ as
distinct from actual evapotranspiration.”

At about the same time that Thornthwaite (1948) was making climate
observations, agronomists were struggling with the notion of plant
evapotranspiration. The Blaney-Criddle and Hargreaves-Samani methods
attempt to link a method to a specific vegetation type and condition or
reference crop. The potential evapotranspiration associated with a
specific crop may be considered to be a reference evapotranspiration
amount. The Blaney-Criddle method, for example, links the potential
evapotranspiration to a 80–150 millimeters tall actively growing
green-grass cover, “completely shading the ground and not short of
water” (Allen and Pruitt, 1986).

SWB provides the Jensen-Haise (Jensen and Haise, 1963) and the
Hargreaves-Samani (Hargreaves and Samani, 1985) methods for estimating
potential or reference evapotranspiration. The Jensen-Haise method for
estimating potential evapotranspiration (ET) was developed with
evapotranspiration data for several crop types common to the
southwestern United States. The Hargreaves-Samani method for estimating
reference evapotranspiration (ET<sub>0</sub>) was developed with
evapotranspiration data pertaining to a reference crop of fescue grass
of known length. In SWB, both of these method rely on air temperature
observations (table 1–9) to estimate the amount of extraterrestrial
solar radiation that reaches the crop surface. Both methods will likely
return similar values. The Jensen-Haise method may be more appropriate
for sites in the southwestern United States. Users should examine the
SWB-estimated potential evapotranspiration amounts and compare them to
estimates published by university agricultural extension services and
others.

1.  Data requirements for the reference/potential evapotranspiration
    estimation methods included in SWB.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Method</th>
<th>Minimum air temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)</th>
<th>Maximum air temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)</th>
<th><p>Gridded monthly</p>
<p>estimates</p>
<p>(inches/month)</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Jensen-Haise</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Hargreaves-Samani</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Monthly gridded</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The distinction between potential ET and reference ET<sub>0</sub> is
more important if the FAO–56 crop coefficients are to be applied as
modifiers to the potential or reference evapotranspiration values. Crop
coefficients are often determined and published with a particular
reference crop in mind. The crop coefficients published in Allen and
others (1998) are developed with the same reference crop Festuca altaica
(Alta fescue) grass that was used to develop the Hargreaves-Samani
method. Solar radiation at the top of the atmosphere (extraterrestrial
solar radiation) is calculated for both the Jensen-Haise and the
Hargreaves-Samani methods by making use of standard estimation equations
that take into account Earth’s position and tilt relative to the sun and
the position of the grid cell upon the Earth. The equations are applied
using the latitude and longitude of each grid cell for each day of the
year; the form of the equations used to calculate extraterrestrial solar
radiation are in Meeus (1991).

Jensen-Haise Method
-------------------

Jensen and Haise (1963) developed an empirical method that related
potential evapotranspiration to solar radiation and air temperature for
several crops grown in the southwestern United States—crop types
included alfalfa, oats, cotton, and winter wheat. The equation is as
follows:

*$$E{T\_p} = \\left( {0.014 \\cdot {T\_{mean}} - 0.38} \\right){R\_s}$$*
(1–12)

where

*$E{T\_p}$* is the daily potential evapotranspiration, in inches;

*${T\_{mean}}$* is the mean daily air temperature, in degrees
Fahrenheit; and

*${R\_s}$* is the solar radiation received at the crop surface, in
inches per day.

Solar radiation at the crop surface is estimated as a function of the
percentage of total possible sunshine that was received on a given day:

*${R\_s} = \\left( {a + b \\cdot {f\_{sun}}} \\right){R\_a}$* (1–13)

where

*${R\_s}$* is the solar radiation received at the crop surface, in
inches per day;

*$a$* is the fraction of total solar radiation received on an overcast
day (dimensionless), often 0.25;

*$b$* is the fraction of total solar radiation received on a clear day
(dimensionless), often 0.75;

*${f\_{sun}}$* is the amount of daily sunshine as a fraction of total
possible sunshine (dimensionless); and

*${R\_a}$* is the extraterrestrial solar radiation, in inches per day.

The use of equation 1–13 requires data on the fraction of total
sunshine, which is usually difficult to find on a consistent basis. SWB
uses minimum and maximum air temperature to estimate the fraction of
total possible sunshine (Allen and Pruitt, 1986):

*${f\_{sun}} = \\left( {0.35\\sqrt {{T\_{max}} - {T\_{min}}} } \\right)
- 0.5$* (1–14)

where

*${f\_{sun}}$* is the amount of daily sunshine as a fraction of total
possible sunshine (dimensionless),

*${T\_{max}}$* is the maximum daily air temperature, in Kelvin; and

*${T\_{min}}$* is the minimum daily air temperature, in Kelvin.

Hargreaves-Samani Method
------------------------

The Hargreaves and Samani equation was developed as a way to calculate
reference evapotranspiration using only limited data. The coefficients
were developed with data derived from a weighing lysimeter planted with
Alta fescue grass (Hargreaves and Samani, 1985). The equation is as
follows:

*$E{T\_0} = 0.0023\\,\\,\\left( {{T\_{mean}} + 17.8} \\right)\\sqrt
{{T\_{{\\rm{max}}}} - {T\_{{\\rm{min}}}}} \\;{R\_a}$* (1–15)

where

*$E{T\_0}$* is the grass-reference evapotranspiration, in millimeters
per day;

*${T\_{mean}}$* is the mean daily air temperature, in degrees Celsius;

*${T\_{max}}$* is the maximum air temperature, in degrees Celsius;

*${T\_{min}}$* is the mean daily air temperature, in degrees Celsius;
and

*${R\_a}$* is extraterrestrial solar radiation, in millimeters per day.

Monthly Grid
------------

If available, users also may use gridded daily or monthly estimates of
reference or potential evapotranspiration. These gridded estimates allow
SWB to be run using more sophisticated evapotranspiration estimates,
including satellite-derived estimates.

Actual Evapotranspiration/Soil-Moisture Retention
=================================================

Actual evapotranspiration is the soil moisture that can be extracted
from a soil of a given soil-moisture condition; by definition, actual
evapotranspiration will be equal to or less than the potential
evapotranspiration. In the days following a rainstorm, soil moisture is
close to field capacity, and moisture is evaporated from bare soil and
transpired by plants at rates close to the maximum rate sustainable for
given climatic conditions. Assuming no further precipitation, in
subsequent days the evaporation and transpiration rates decrease as
remaining soil moisture is held more tightly within the soil matrix
(Dunne and Leopold, 1978).

Common terms regarding these concepts are listed and defined in table
1–10. More detail about each of these concepts is in Allen and others
(1998).

1.  Definitions of common terms used in describing soil-moisture
    retention and actual evapotranspiration.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Term                          Units          Definition
  ----------------------------- -------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Field capacity                inches         Soil-moisture value at which the soil matrix is nearly saturated and gravity drainage from the soil ceases.

  Wilting point                 inches         Soil-moisture value below which plants are incapable of extracting further soil moisture for growth. Sometimes called the permanent wilting point because irreversible plant stress and subsequent death are common once the soil reaches this moisture value.

  *${\\theta \_{FC}}$*          inches         Soil-moisture amount equivalent to a soil’s field capacity.

  *${\\theta \_{WP}}$*          inches         Soil-moisture amount below which most plants experience irreversible wilting.

  *$TAW$*                       inches         Total available water. This is the amount of water available in the soil for potential plant growth and can be calculated as *${\\theta \_{FC}} - {\\theta \_{WP}}$*.

  *$RAW$*                       inches         Readily available water. In the FAO–56 methodology, the readily available water is available to plants at a rate equal to potential evapotranspiration.

  *$p$*                         \[unitless\]   Plant water stress depletion fraction. This is the fraction of total available water that may be used by plants before they begin to experience water stress (and subsequent reduction in actual evapotranspiration rates); *$p = {{RAW} \\over {TAW}}$*.

  *${\\theta \_{threshold}}$*   inches         Threshold soil moisture. This is the soil moisture below which plants begin to experience water stress; *${\\theta \_{threshold}} = p \\cdot \\left( {{\\theta \_{FC}} - {\\theta \_{WP}}} \\right) + {\\theta \_{WP}}$*.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A way of simulating decreasing rates of soil-moisture evapotranspiration
is to assume that the actual evapotranspiration is some function of the
potential or reference evapotranspiration and the current soil-moisture
amount (eq. 1–16).

*$$AET = PET \\cdot f\\left( {{{\\theta - {\\theta \_{WP}}} \\over
{{\\theta \_{FC}} - {\\theta \_{WP}}}}} \\right)$$* (1–16)

where

*$AET$* is the actual evapotranspiration, in inches;

*$PET$* is the potential evapotranspiration, in inches;

*$f$* is a function of arbitrary shape;

*$\\theta $* is the current soil-moisture amount, in inches;

*${\\theta \_{WP}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the permanent
wilting point, in inches; and

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at field-capacity, in
inches.

Many different functions have been developed to relate potential
evapotranspiration to actual evapotranspiration. Veihmeyer (1938)
suggested that soil evapotranspiration is equal to potential
evapotranspiration regardless of how close the soil moisture is to the
wilting point. Zahner (1967) proposed a set of relations that changed
depending on whether the soils in question were predominantly sand,
loam, or clay. The relation included in FAO–56 (Allen and others, 1998)
assumes that actual evapotranspiration and potential evapotranspiration
are equal up to some critical soil-moisture level. At the point of
critical soil moisture (coinciding with the onset of plant water
stress), the ratio of actual to potential ET decreases until the soil
moisture equals the wilting point where the ratio of actual to potential
ET reaches a value of zero. At soil moisture equal to the field
capacity, Thornthwaite and Mather (1957) considered the ratio of actual
to potential ET to be equal to one, decreasing linearly to zero at a
soil moisture equal to the wilting point.

The two soil-moisture retention methods implemented in SWB are discussed
in this section; one method developed by Thornthwaite and Mather (1957)
and the other method included in the FAO–56 approach (Allen and others,
1998).

Thornthwaite-Mather Method
--------------------------

In the late 1940s and early 1950s, C.W. Thornthwaite and his associates
studied plant growth and water utilization. As a result of this work,
Thornthwaite observed that the relation between the actual ET to
potential ET ratio and the soil moisture was linear (fig. 1–4).

1.  Thornthwaite-Mather relation between actual and potential
    evapotranspiration.

The first versions of SWB included full-tabularized versions of the
soil-moisture retention function, along with methods to interpolate
among the various table values. The original published method
(Thornthwaite and Mather, 1957) also introduced a variable, accumulated
potential water loss (APWL), to track the cumulative unmet potential
evapotranspiration; this term APWL was developed in an age before easy
access to computers and calculators; when used with the table values,
this set of tabulated, APWL values made calculation of the daily water
balance simpler. SWB updates the soil-moisture value by means of the
relation derived in equations 1–17 through 1–25. Daily soil moisture may
be estimated from this relation by first defining the instantaneous soil
evapotranspiration as equal to the change in soil-moisture storage:

*$e{t\_a} = - {{d\\theta } \\over {dt}}$* (1–17)

where

*$e{t\_a}$* is the instantaneous actual evapotranspiration, and

*${{d\\theta } \\over {dt}}$* is the rate of change in soil moisture
relative to time.

The relation shown in figure 1–4 can be used to define a function
relating actual and potential evapotranspiration as:

*$e{t\_a} = e{t\_0} \\cdot {\\theta \\over {{\\theta \_{FC}}}}$* (1–18)

where

*$e{t\_a}$* is the instantaneous actual evapotranspiration,

*$e{t\_0}$* is the instantaneous potential evapotranspiration,

*$\\theta $* is the soil moisture, and

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil-moisture value at field capacity.

Equation 1–17 and equation 1–18 can be set equal to one another, and the
terms can be rearranged and integrated to yield an estimate of the
current daily soil moisture:

*$ - {{d\\theta } \\over {dt}} = e{t\_0} \\cdot {\\theta \\over
{{\\theta \_{FC}}}}$*, (1–19)

*${{d\\theta } \\over \\theta } = - {{e{t\_0}} \\over {{\\theta
\_{FC}}}}dt$*, and (1–20)

*$\\smallint {{d\\theta } \\over \\theta } = - {1 \\over {{\\theta
\_{FC}}}}\\smallint e{t\_0}dt$* (1–21)

where

*${{d\\theta } \\over {dt}}$* is the rate of change in soil moisture
relative to time,

*$e{t\_0}$* is the instantaneous potential evapotranspiration,

*$\\theta $* is the soil moisture,

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil-moisture value at field capacity,

*$d\\theta $* is the change in soil-moisture, and

*dt* is the change in time.

The integral of the instantaneous potential ET during the course of a
day is equal to the total daily reference ET<sub>0</sub> value\[. An
interim soil-moisture value may be defined as:

*${\\theta \_{interim}} = {\\theta \_{t - 1}} + rainfall + irrigation +
snowmelt + runon - interception - runoff$* (1–22)

where

*${\\theta \_{interim}}$* is the interim soil moisture, and

*${\\theta \_{t - 1}}$* is the soil moisture on the previous day.

The integral of soil moisture is evaluated from*${\\theta \_{interim}}$*
to *$${\\theta \_t}$$*:

*$\\left. {{\\rm{ln}}\\theta } \\right|\_{{\\theta
\_{interim}}}^{{\\theta \_t}} = - {{E{T\_0}} \\over {{\\theta
\_{FC}}}}$* (1–23)

where

*${\\theta \_t}$* is the soil moisture on the current day,

*${\\theta \_{interim}}$* is the interim soil moisture,

*$E{T\_0}$* is the reference evapotranspiration, and

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil moisture at the field capacity for the
soil.

Exponentiating both sides and solving for the current soil moisture
*${\\theta \_t}$*yields:

*${\\theta \_t} = {\\theta \_{interim}} \\cdot {e^{\\left( { -
{{E{T\_0}} \\over {{\\theta \_{FC}}}}} \\right)}}$* (1–24)

where terms are the same as those defined for equation 1–23.

The actual ET value*$E{T\_{actual}}$* is the difference between the
interim and final soil-moisture values:

*$$E{T\_{actual}} = {\\theta \_{interim}} - {\\theta \_t}$$* (1–25)

FAO–56 Method
-------------

The FAO–56 method for determining actual evapotranspiration considers
the process in two phases (fig. 1–5). In the first phase, soil-moisture
levels are between a threshold soil-moisture level and field capacity,
and the actual ET is assumed to be equal to the reference
ET<sub>0</sub>. At soil-moisture levels below the threshold level, the
ratio between actual and reference ET<sub>0</sub> is assumed to decrease
linearly, with the ratio having a value of zero as the soil moisture
reaches the permanent wilting point.

1.  FAO–56 relation between actual and reference evapotranspiration.

The first step toward estimating the daily actual evapotranspiration is
to eliminate evapotranspiration from the water balance equation and
calculate an interim soil-moisture:

*${\\theta \_{interim}} = {\\theta \_{t - 1}} + rainfall + irrigation +
snowmelt + runon - interception - runoff$* (1–26)

where

*${\\theta \_{interim}}$* is the interim soil moisture, and

*${\\theta \_{t - 1}}$* is the soil moisture on the previous day.

The relation shown in figure 1–5 may be used to update the interim soil
moisture by considering the following three cases:

1.  *${\\theta \_{threshold}} = 0$*, which eliminates the sloped part of
    figure 1–5;

2.  *${\\theta \_{interim}} &gt; {\\theta \_{threshold}}$*, which
    implies that actual ET equals reference ET<sub>0</sub> for all or
    part of the day; and

3.  *${\\theta \_{interim}} \\le {\\theta \_{threshold}}$*, which means
    that the actual ET is some fraction of reference ET<sub>0</sub> for
    the entire day.

In the first case, actual ET equals reference ET<sub>0</sub>, so the new
soil-moisture value is:

*$${\\theta \_t} = {\\theta \_{interim}} - E{T\_0}$$* (1–27)

where

*${\\theta \_{interim}}$* is the interim soil-moisture amount, in
inches; and

*$E{T\_0}$* is the daily reference evapotranspiration amount, in inches.

The second case is a linear combination of the first and third cases,
and *$f$*can be defined as the fraction of the day that the
soil-moisture value would exceed the threshold value:

*$f = {{\\left( {{\\theta \_{interim}} - {\\theta \_{threshold}}}
\\right)} \\over {E{T\_0}}}$* (1–28)

where

*${\\theta \_{interim}}$* is the interim soil-moisture amount, in
inches;

*${\\theta \_{threshold}}$* is the soil-moisture amount below which
plant stress occurs, in inches; and

*$E{T\_0}$* is the daily reference evapotranspiration amount, in inches.

The new soil-moisture value for the current day can then be determined
as:

*$${\\theta \_t} = {\\theta \_{threshold}} \\cdot {e^{\\left( { - {{(1 -
f)\\,E{T\_0}} \\over {{\\theta \_{threshold}}}}} \\right)}}$$* (1–29)

where

*${\\theta \_{threshold}}$* is the soil-moisture amount below which
plant stress occurs, in inches;

*$f$* is the fraction of the day that soil moisture exceeds the
threshold (eq. 1–28), in inches; and

*$E{T\_0}$* is the daily reference evapotranspiration amount, in inches.

The actual ET value is then the difference between the interim and final
soil-moisture values:

*$$E{T\_{actual}} = {\\theta \_{interim}} - {\\theta \_t}$$* (1–30)

where

*${\\theta \_{interim}}$* is the interim soil-moisture amount, in
inches; and

*${\\theta \_t}$* is the daily soil-moisture amount, in inches.

In the third case, new soil-moisture value for the current day can be
determined as:

*${\\theta \_t} = {\\theta \_{interim}} \\cdot {e^{\\left( { -
{{E{T\_0}} \\over {{\\theta \_{interim}}}}} \\right)}}$* (1–31)

Growing Degree Day
==================

SWB calculates the growing degree day (GDD) specific to each crop type,
if desired. The GDD is calculated by summing the difference between the
mean air temperature and some base temperature for a specified number of
days:

*$$GDD = \\sum\\limits\_n {\\left\[ {{{({T\_{max}} + {T\_{min}})} \\over
2} - {T\_{base}}} \\right\]} $$* (1–32)

where

*GDD* is growing degree days,

*$n$* is the number of days during which the calculation is performed,

*${T\_{max}}$* is the maximum daily air temperatures,

*${T\_{min}}$* is the minimum daily air temperatures,

*${T\_{base}}$* is a reference temperature, often crop or plant
specific.

Temperature values in the GDD calculation are often restrained to
prevent the GDD values from growing unreasonably. When applying the
method to corn, for example, *T<sub>base</sub>* is often set to 50
degrees Fahrenheit (°F), *T<sub>max</sub>* is set to 86 °F, and
*T<sub>min</sub>* is set to 50 °F. If no values are provided by the
user, SWB uses the values for corn (*T<sub>base</sub>* of 50 °F, a
*T<sub>max</sub>* of 86 °F, and a *T<sub>min</sub>* of 50 °F).

Growing Season
==============

SWB keeps track of a binary state variable (a variable having a value of
either zero or one) that indicates growing season status. Growing season
in SWB is either active or inactive. Growing season status affects plant
interception calculations and antecedent runoff conditions (table 1–7).

The growing season is tracked independently of other plant-growth
related parameters, such as the planting date defined for use with the
crop-coefficient module. These parameters remain unlinked and unrelated
because the crop-coefficient module will not necessarily be active for
every SWB simulation.

Two methods are available for keeping track of the growing/nongrowing
season status. The simplest method allows a day of year or month and day
to be input for each land-use type in order to control when the growing
season status is flipped. The second method allows a minimum growing
degree-day value to be set to initiate plant growth and a minimum
mean-air temperature (killing air temperature) to be set to halt plant
growth.

The two methods may be mixed, in other words, a set of starting and
ending dates may be defined for a particular land-use or crop type,
whereas a growing degree-day threshold and killing air temperature may
be specified for another land-use or crop type.

Crop Coefficients
=================

The FAO–56 methodology links the estimation of actual evapotranspiration
to growth patterns of vegetation and crops by means of a
crop-coefficient curve that changes during a growing season. The amount
of water required by the vegetation of a crop at any point during a
growing season is given in equation 1–33:

*$$E{T\_c} = {K\_c}E{T\_0}$$* (1–33)

where

*$E{T\_c}$* is crop evapotranspiration,

*${K\_c}$* is the crop coefficient, and

*$E{T\_0}$* is the reference evapotranspiration.

The crop evapotranspiration equation (eq. 1–33) is valid for ideal or
standard conditions––a condition in which soil moisture stays close to
field capacity regardless of plant water use. An example of the
simplified crop-coefficient curve used in the FAO–56 calculation is
shown in figure 1–6. The curve is made up of a set of piecewise linear
functions that define the overall shape of the crop-coefficient curve
during a growing season. Specification of this curve for each crop and
plant type (land-use type) in the model requires that a set of growth
stage lengths *L<sub>ini</sub>, L<sub>dev</sub>, L<sub>mid</sub>,
L<sub>late</sub>, and L<sub>fallow</sub>*, and a set of corresponding
crop coefficients that are included in the irrigation lookup table. The
growth stage lengths represent the number of days each growth stage
lasts. The growth stage lengths are added to the day of year at time of
planting which yields the day of year associated with the inflection
points defining the crop coefficient curve in figure 1–6. Note that
because the crop-coefficient values may have values greater than one,
the crop water requirement can easily exceed the potential or reference
ET values during peak growth periods. The length values that form the
crop-coefficient curve may be replaced with growing degree days. SWB
calculates, if desired, the growing degree days specific to each crop
type.

1.  Example simplified crop-coefficient curve.

Single-Factor Crop Evapotranspiration
--------------------------------------

The calculation of actual evapotranspiration during nonstandard
(moisture-limited) growing conditions is to multiply the crop
evapotranspiration amount by a plant water stress factor whose value may
range between 0.0 and 1.0. The water stress factor declines toward zero
as the amount of available soil moisture decreases. The adjusted crop
evapotranspiration is given in equation 1–34.

*$E{T\_{c,adj}} = {K\_s}{K\_c}E{T\_o}$* (1–34)

where

*$E{T\_{c,adj}}$* is adjusted crop evapotranspiration,

*${K\_s}$* is the plant water stress factor,

*${K\_c}$* is the crop coefficient, and

*$E{T\_0}$* is the reference or potential evapotranspiration.

The plant water stress factor is defined by the soil-moisture deficit
relative to two soil-moisture amounts—the readily available water and
total available water amounts. Total available water is defined as the
maximum amount of water that can be present within the root zone and is
calculated in SWB as:

*$TAW = AWC \\cdot \\left( {rooting\\;depth} \\right) = {\\theta \_{FC}}
- {\\theta \_{WP}}$* (1–35)

where

*$TAW$* is the total available water;

*$AWC$* is the available water capacity, in inches per foot;

*$rooting\\;depth$* is the current rooting depth of vegetation, in feet;

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the field capacity
of the soil, in inches ; and

*${\\theta \_{WP}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the permanent
wilting point, in inches.

Readily available water is defined as the amount of water that can be
withdrawn by a plant from soil-moisture storage without the plant
suffering water stress. Readily available water may be defined as some
fraction of the total available water:

*$RAW = p \\cdot TAW$* (1–36)

where

*RAW* is readily available water, and

*$p$* is the fraction of total available water (*TAW*) that can be
removed from soil-moisture storage before a plant begins suffering from
water stress; *p* is called the plant\_stress\_depletion\_fraction in
the SWB irrigation lookup table.

The soil-moisture deficit is calculated as *$deficit = TAW - {\\theta
\_t}$* and represents the amount by which the current daily soil
moisture departs from the total available moisture storage capacity of
the soil. At soil-moisture deficits less than the readily available
water amount, plants are assumed to have adequate available moisture for
growth; plants are assumed to not have water stress, and the plant water
stress factor has a value of one.

Once soil-moisture deficit increases beyond the readily available water
amount, the plant water stress factor decreases linearly, reaching a
value of zero as the soil-moisture deficit approaches the total
available water value, or alternatively, as the daily soil-moisture
value reaches a value close to the wilting point. How the plant water
stress factor changes with changing soil-moisture amounts is shown in
figure 1–7.

1.  Plant water stress coefficient as a function of the soil-water
    content.

In the SWB irrigation lookup table, the
plant\_stress\_depletion\_fraction (*p*) defines the soil-moisture
conditions below which the actual to potential ET ratio begins to
decline toward zero. SWB uses this parameter to define the soil-water
content threshold at which plant water depletion begins to stress
vegetation and reduce evapotranspiration, as indicated in equation 1–37.

*$${\\theta \_{threshold}} = {\\theta \_{WP}} + p \\cdot \\left(
{{\\theta \_{FC}} - {\\theta \_{WP}}} \\right) = {\\theta \_{WP}} + p
\\cdot TAW$$* (1–37)

where

*${\\theta \_{threshold}}$* is the soil-moisture amount below which
plant stress occurs, in inches;

*${\\theta \_{WP}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the permanent
wilting point, in inches;

*$p$* is the plant stress depletion fraction (dimensionless);

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the field capacity,
in inches; and

*$TAW$* is the total available soil-moisture storage amount, in inches.

Rooting Depth
=============

The dynamic rooting-depth method is a way to account for the fact that
when plants are small, less of the moisture within the soil-moisture
reservoir is actually available for uptake and growth. When this method
is selected, the current rooting depth is allowed to range between a
small value (0.15 foot) and the maximum root-zone depth specified in the
lookup table. The minimum root-zone depth is assumed during initial
plant growth (*L<sub>ini</sub>* in fig. 1–6) and is assumed to increase
linearly during plant development (*L<sub>dev</sub>* in fig. 1–6),
reaching the maximum root-zone depth at the start of the primary
plant-growth stage (*L<sub>mid</sub>* in fig. 1–6).

Dynamic rooting depth has no effect on calculations unless FAO–56 crop
coefficients are being used in the simulation. With dynamic rooting
depth enabled, the amount of total available water is allowed to grow
larger as plant growth increases. Soil-moisture conditions in springtime
often result in plant water stress when rooting depths are at a minimum.
As the total available water and current rooting depths increase through
the growing season, a larger soil-moisture reservoir is available to
plants; therefore, the soil-moisture conditions are less likely to
result in plant stress. Of course, those generalizations assume a
constant amount of precipitation.

Irrigation Demand and Application
=================================

Once the FAO–56 procedure has been used to estimate the crop-water
requirements, the next step in the process of simulating
irrigation-water demand is to apply the water in a realistic manner. The
applied irrigation water is not a source that is explicitly modeled by
SWB; the irrigation water is supplied as an unspecified source external
to SWB. Linkage to the groundwater system could be accomplished by
postprocessing the SWB-calculated irrigation amounts and supplying those
values to the MODFLOW WELL package (McDonald and Harbaugh, 1988) along
with the SWB-calculated net-infiltration values.

The first step in simulating irrigation application is to compare the
depletion fraction value to the user-specified maximum allowable
soil-moisture deficit. The depletion fraction is calculated as follows:

*$$depletion\\;fraction = 1 - {{\\left( {{\\theta \_{t - 1}} - {\\theta
\_{WP}}} \\right)} \\over {\\left( {{\\theta \_{FC}} - {\\theta \_{WP}}}
\\right)}}$$* (1–38)

where

*${\\theta \_{t - 1}}$* is the soil-moisture amount calculated on the
previous day, in inches;

*${\\theta \_{WP}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the permanent
wilting point of the soil, in inches; and

*${\\theta \_{FC}}$* is the soil-moisture amount at the field capacity
of the soil, in inches.

The depletion fraction in equation 1–38 takes on a value of zero when
soil-moisture values are at the soil’s field capacity and a value of one
when soil-moisture values reach the wilting point. Like the depletion
fraction, the maximum allowable deficit takes on values in the range
from 0 to 1. A value of zero indicates that no soil-moisture deficit is
tolerable for the crop and will result in almost continuous irrigation.
A value of one effectively indicates that depletion of the soil
reservoir is tolerable and will result in irrigation almost never being
applied. The maximum allowable depletion fraction is often set equal to
the plant water stress fraction (see table 1–10 for definition). Setting
the maximum allowable depletion equal to the plant stress depletion
fraction in simulated irrigation being applied whenever the soil
moisture declines below the threshold soil-moisture value at which plant
growth begins to become impaired.

Once a cell’s soil-moisture status has triggered a need for simulated
irrigation, SWB has a few rules that may be specified per land-use or
crop type. These rules determine how much of the soil-moisture deficit
is eliminated in the simulated irrigation event. The following is a list
of these rules.

*Restore soil moisture to field capacity*—Complete elimination of
soil-moisture deficit on a cell by cell basis. This option calculates
the amount of water to be applied as the difference between the maximum
soil-moisture value and the soil-moisture value from the previous day.
Thus, this amount ignores the current day’s water-balance components;
the same irrigation amount will be calculated regardless of rainfall
conditions.

*Restore soil moisture to some fraction of field capacity—*Restore soil
moisture to some specified tolerable level of soil-moisture deficit
(deficit irrigation). This option calculates the amount of water to be
applied as the difference between the soil moisture at some preset
deficit amount and the soil-moisture value from the previous day. The
parameter value supplied to SWB to define this deficit amount is best
described as the fraction of the maximum soil moisture that should be
used as the baseline value in the calculation. In other words,

*$$irrigation\\;amount = f \\cdot {\\theta \_{fc}} - {\\theta \_{t -
1}}$$* (1–39)

*Apply fixed amount of irrigation*— Apply the same, constant amount of
water once the soil-moisture deficit exceeds the maximum allowable
deficit. Many irrigators have sized their equipment to handle
application events of average size; for example, a center-pivot
irrigation setup might only be capable of delivering water within a
narrow range of values. Under this option, a set amount of water is
applied to the cell. If the set amount brings the soil moisture to a
value in excess of field capacity, a recharge event will be triggered.

*Apply demand-based amount on a prescribed monthly schedule*— This
option is similar to the “restore soil moisture to field capacity”
option, except that the calculated irrigation amount accounts for the
daily or monthly rainfall and runoff amount and only is applied on a set
schedule. This option was extracted from the Hawaii Water Budget code
and is designed to simulate the unique irrigation conditions in the
Pacific Islands; the calculation is dependent on the monthly, rather
than daily, datasets that generally are available in the Pacific
Islands.

The irrigation amount for each day that irrigation is scheduled is
calculated as:

*$$irrigation\\;amount = {{(E{T\_{crop}} \\cdot {n\_{irr}} + runoff -
rainfall)} \\over {{n\_{month}}}}$$* (1–40)

where

*$E{T\_{crop}}$* is the crop evapotranspiration value, the amount of
water the plant would use if not water limited;

*${n\_{irr}}$* is the number of irrigation days in the month;

*$runoff$* is the monthly total runoff amount;

*$rainfall$* is the monthly total rainfall amount; and

*${n\_{month}}$* is the number of days in the month.

The number of irrigation days in the month is determined by the monthly
irrigation schedule parameter, which is a pattern of zeros and ones. The
monthly irrigation schedule parameter values are 31 characters long,
which determine the timing of irrigation (table 1–11).

1.  Example of monthly irrigation schedule parameter values for several
    irrigation frequencies.

  ----------------------------------------------------------
  Irrigation frequency   Monthly irrigation schedule value
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------
  Weekly (approximate)   1000001000001000001000001000000

  Every other day        0101010101010101010101010101010

  Every 3 days           0010010010010010010010010010010
  ----------------------------------------------------------

Irrigation can be defined for whole crop and vegetation types; however,
at times, more control is needed regarding the simulation of irrigation
at a particular location. A supplemental irrigation mask grid can be
provided to SWB to fine tune which portions of various crop and
vegetation types are given simulated irrigation. A value of one means
the cell is allowed to receive irrigation, whereas a value of zero
blocks the cell from receiving irrigation water. An example of an
irrigated lands mask is shown in figure 1–8.

1.  Example of irrigated lands mask.

Rejected Net Infiltration
=========================

Specification of maximum daily net-infiltration values is a crude but
effective way of preventing SWB from calculating unreasonably high
net-infiltration values. With flow routing enabled, downslope cells can
have large amounts of water diverted to them. The resulting calculated
net-infiltration values sometimes exceed the values that might be
reasonable given the soils and underlying geology. Setting a maximum
daily net-infiltration value will prevent these cells from taking on
unrealistic net-infiltration values.

In cases where the calculated daily net infiltration is greater than the
cell's maximum daily net-infiltration limit, the net infiltration for
the cell is set to the maximum daily net-infiltration value, and the
remaining water is converted to rejected net infiltration. This rejected
net infiltration is then routed to the next downslope cell where the
water becomes available for runoff, recharge, or evapotranspiration.
Maximum net-infiltration values are user-defined and are often set to
values approximating the vertical hydraulic-conductivity values for the
underlying MODFLOW application. If left unspecified, SWB enforces no
limits on calculated net-infiltration rates.

References Cited
================

Allen, Richard, Pereira, Luis, Raes, Dirk, and Smith, Martin, 1998, Crop
evapotranspiration—Guidelines for computing crop water requirements:
Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, FAO
Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 56, 174 p.

Allen, R.G., and Pruitt, W.O., 1986, Rational use of the FAO
Blaney‐Criddle Formula: Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering,
v. 112, no. 2, p. 139–155.

Cooley, K.R., and Lane, L.J., 1982, Modified runoff curve numbers for
sugarcane and pineapple fields in Hawaii: Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation, v. 37, no. 5, p. 295–298.

Cronshey, Roger, McCuen, R.H., Miller, Norman, Rawls, Walter, Robbins,
Sam, and Woodward, Don, 1986, Urban hydrology for small
watersheds—Technical Release 55: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Conservation Engineering Division,
accessed August 23, 2017, at
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/16/stelprdb1044171.pdf>.

Dripps, W.R., and Bradbury, K.R., 2007, A simple daily
soil–water-balance model for estimating the spatial and temporal
distribution of groundwater recharge in temperate humid areas:
Hydrogeology Journal, v. 15, no. 3, p. 433–444.

Dunne, Thomas, and Leopold, Luna, 1978, Water in environmental planning:
W.H. Freeman, 818 p.

Gash, J.H.C., 1979, An analytical model of rainfall interception by
forests: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, v. 105,
no. 443, p. 43–55.

Gash, J.H.C., Lloyd, C.R., and Lachaud, G., 1995, Estimating sparse
forest rainfall interception with an analytical model: Journal of
Hydrology, v. 170, no. 1, p. 79–86.

Gash, J.H.C., and Morton, A.J., 1978, An application of the Rutter model
to the estimation of the interception loss from Thetford forest: Journal
of Hydrology, v. 38, nos. 1–2, p. 49–58.

Hanson, C.L., Neff, E.L., Doyle, J.T., and Gilbert, T.L., 1981, Runoff
curve numbers for Northern Plains rangelands: Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation, v. 36, no. 5, p. 302–305.

Hargreaves, G.H., and Samani, Z.A., 1985, Reference crop
evapotranspiration from temperature: Applied Engineering in Agriculture,
v. 1, no. 2, p. 96–99.

Hauser, V.L., and Jones, O.R., 1991, Runoff curve numbers for the
Southern High Plains: Transactions of the ASAE, v. 34, no. 1, p.
142–148.

Hawkins, R.H., Ward, T.J., Woodward, D.E., and Van Mullem, J.A., 2009,
Curve number hydrology—State of the practice: Reston, Va., American
Society of Civil Engineers, 106 p.

Horton, R.E., 1919, Rainfall interception: American Meteorological
Society, Monthly weather review, v. 47, no. 9, p. 603–623, accessed
November 1, 2016, at
<http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0493%281919%2947%3C603%3ARI%3E2.0.CO%3B2>.

Izuka, S.K., Oki, D.S., and Engott, J.A., 2010, Simple method for
estimating groundwater recharge on tropical islands: Journal of
Hydrology, v. 387, no. 1, p. 81–89.

Jensen, M.E., and Haise, H.R., 1963, Estimating evapotranspiration from
solar radiation: American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of the
Irrigation and Drainage Division, Proceedings, v. 89, p. 15–41.

McDonald, M.G., and Harbaugh, A.W., 1988, MODFLOW—A modular
three-dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model: U.S.
Geological Survey Techniques of Water-Resource Investigations, book 6,
chap. A1, 586 p.

Meeus, J.H., 1991, Astronomical algorithms: Willmann-Bell, Incorporated,
477 p.

Mishra, S.K., and Singh, V., 2003, Soil Conservation Service curve
number (SCS–CN) methodology: Dortrecht, Netherlands, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 514 p.

Molnau, Myron., and Bissell, Verno, 1983, A continuous frozen ground
index for flood forecasting, *in* Proceedings 51st Annual Meeting
Western Snow Conference: Cambridge, Ontario, Canadian Water Resources
Association, p. 109–119.

O’Callaghan, J.F., and Mark, D.M., 1984, The extraction of drainage
networks from digital elevation data: Computer vision, graphics, and
image processing, v. 28, no. 3, p. 323–344.

Savenije, H.H.G., 2004, The importance of interception and why we should
delete the term evapotranspiration from our vocabulary: Hydrological
Processes, v. 18, no. 8, p. 1507–1511.

Thornthwaite, C.W., 1948, An approach toward a rational classification
of climate: Geographical Review, v. 38, no. 1, p. 55.

Thornthwaite, C.W., and Mather, J.R., 1957, Instructions and tables for
computing potential evapotranspiration and the water balance:
Publications in Climatology, v. 10, no. 3, p. 1–104.

Veihmeyer, F.J., 1938, Evaporation from soils and
transpiration—Transactions: American Geophysical Union, v. 19, p.
612–619.

Westenbroek, S.M., Kelson, V.A., Dripps, W.R., Hunt, R.J., and Bradbury,
K.R., 2010, SWB—A modified Thornthwaite-Mather soil-water-balance code
for estimating groundwater recharge: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques
and Methods, book 6, chap. A31, p. 1–61.

Woodward, Donald; Hawkins, Richard; Jiang, Ruiyan; Hjelmfelt, Allen,
Jr.; Van Mullem, Joseph; and Quan, Quan, 2003, Runoff curve number
method—Examination of the initial abstraction ratio, *in* Conference
Proceeding Paper, Philadelphia, Pa., June 23–26, 2003, Proceedings:
Philadelphia, Pa., World Water and Environmental Resources Congress.

Zahner, Robert, 1967, Refinement in empirical functions for realistic
soil-moisture regimes under forest cover *in* Sopper, W.E., and Lull,
H.W., eds., International Symposium of Forest Hydrology: New York,
Pergamon Press, p. 261–272.
